# Neurological Drivers, Expanding Consciousness, Letting Go Of Fixations

Okay, welcome back. What questions do you have? Since we're doing a series of Hakalau anchors and exercises, if once we pick an initial point, we can just stack each exercise on the same point? Well, actually, you're stacking a Hakalau anchor, not the exercise per se, but the anchor. You certainly can stack it.

But my guess is that by now, you probably have got enough stack there that you would go into peripheral vision anyway, just pretty automatically. Right. And you can go into peripheral vision anyway automatically if you want to. Right. It's just that, you know, I'd rather have it one space than having one on my toe and my knee and my arm.

Well, okay. Yes, certainly. Then put it wherever you'd like. And have it be there, wherever it is. Thank you.

Thank you very much. Okay, so how did that go? Okay, so how many people found the problem disappeared? Okay, is there anyone who did not find the problem totally disappeared? Good.

Let's see. That would be roughly 10%. So that's good. So if the problem didn't disappear, you might want to condition the anchor again. If it still didn't disappear, then you may need to go and do timeline therapy to get out, to get rid of the deeper causes of the problem, etc.

And you may need to gather, you may also need to gather more information about that, about the problem in a detailed personal history. So that's what I would suggest. Okay, we're going to move on now to page 421. And this is, I want to warn you in advance, we move from solving problems to actually expanding consciousness in 421. So 421, we move to a new level.

Let's see. I guess I'll do this deductively, if that's okay. So let's do this deductively. Tibetan Buddhism, Tibetan Buddhist medicine, actually, says that disease is due to three things. One is ignorance.

The other is attachments. And the other is aversions. So the last one we just did could be used for aversions. This one that we're looking at is for attachments. Can we play for a second?

Okay. Let me ask you to, can you think of something that you really want? Just stop for a second. Would you please, if you're listening to the tapes, just stop and think of something you really want and then notice if, think of something you really, really want And notice if you're in peripheral vision. How many people are not in peripheral vision?

Yeah, probably when you... And how many people are in peripheral vision when you think of something you want? Okay. So the prediction is that your clients, when they think of something they want, will not be in peripheral vision. Okay?

Now, you guys, we've been conditioning you now for the last two hours. So, okay, so this particular process, think about this for just a minute. Since the whole contains the part and the part contains the whole, then every desire contains its opposite and its essence. But every time we want something, there's an inherent potentiality of not being okay with having it. So this technique will get rid of desires that cause us to be out of balance, primarily attachments or fixations.

This is really good for attachments or fixations. And interestingly enough, by dissolving the desired outcome in the void, you may enhance it actually at happening spontaneously. So it's really weird. It's one of those things where if you give up the desire, often it will come more quickly. Deepak Chopra says the universe spontaneously manifests our desires.

So if it does, if your entire neurology is, if your neurology is a hologram of the universe, then by doing this process, you'll drop your desire into the void or into the universal consciousness. So let's do it together, and there's a couple of possibilities of what could happen. One is the desire could disappear. That's the prediction. Or you could have moved on to, or you could have gotten learnings at a higher logical level.

Or you could have gotten a desire at a higher logical level. So, for example, where someone might have a fixation or an attachment to money, doing this process might change that to being, or wanting prosperity. You understand the difference between money and prosperity, right? So those are all the predictions, but let's do this as a group. So what I'd like you to do, if you would, and if you're listening to the tapes, we can do this together.

What I'd like you to do, if you would, is to, you guys already know how to go into peripheral vision, so we'll just go right, and if you didn't, we would do that. But let's just go right to step number two. So I'd like you to think of something you want, but wish you didn't. Or something which you're fixated about, but you wish you weren't. Or something that you're compulsed that you want, but that you don't want to want.

Okay, does everyone have that if you're doing this along with me? Yeah? Okay, what I'd like you to do now ask yourself how you know that you want that. So ask yourself, how do I know that I want this thing? How do I know that I want this thing?

It may have already changed for you, in which case, that's fine. Now, the knowing, that knowing part, that knowing, sort of knowingness inside you, is going to be the same as what you knew when you got in touch with how you know the problem. It won't be the same, but it'll be the same sort of process. So get in touch with how you know you want that. You can ask yourself, how do I know I want that?

It could be some sort of, for many people it'll be a feeling, for some folks it could be a visual or an auditory, but get in touch with how you know you want that. And when you've got that, then go back into Hakalau again. And as you're in Hakalau, if you notice any shifts, go ahead and preserve the positive learnings. Just go ahead and preserve the positive learnings. Okay.

Let's just see a quick show of hands now. This is a break state. Let's just see a quick show of hands for how many people has the problem, has the problem desire disappeared totally? Okay. 20%. For how many people has, no, we've only done this once now.

For how many people has the problem lessened in intensity but not disappeared? Would you say 60? Yeah? And for how many people has the problem not changed at all? Is there anyone for whom it hasn't changed at all?

Okay, great. Okay, let's do it again. So what I'd like you to do again is to get in touch with how you know you want that. Get in touch with how you know whatever it is you wanted. Now that getting in touch with it may be different for you.

For those of you that are done, you're done. For those of you that did it once and something changed, it may be different for you now, so get in touch with the new how you know you want that, if it's different, or if it's the same, get in touch with the same how you know you want that. And once you've got that, then go back going to suggest you can preserve the positive learnings. Okay, welcome back. Come on back.

We're going to do another break state. Could the people who raised their hand before as the problem disappearing plus the people for whom the problem has now disappeared, totally would you raise your hand? The problem desire. Can we get a percentage? Just so the folks on the tapes will know what percentage of people. 60, would you say?

Yeah, okay, okay, good. Put your hand down. For how many people has the problem lessened even less than it was the previous time, but still not gone? Okay, good. And is there anyone for whom the problem desire has not changed at all?

Good, okay, so it was 60, 40. It was 60, 40, and the third one was zero. So the third question we asked was zero. Okay, we're going to do it again. So what I'd like you to do, and for those of you for whom the problem's changed, which is everyone who's left, remember that you may have a different way of knowing that you still have that problem desire.

So get in touch with how you know you have that desire. Okay, so get in touch with how you know you have that desire or how you know you want that. Get in touch with that. By the way, for some of you, if you're doing the process with your eyes closed and it isn't going as quickly as the other folks, you may want to open your eyes. So try opening your eyes.

And what you can do when you have your eyes open and you're doing this is you can use the, actually the things you're seeing in the room, you can actually use those as anchors. So pick a point on the left side of your peripheral vision and a point on the right side of your peripheral vision and pay attention to those with your eyes open as you are aware of how you know you have that desire or how you know you want that. Once again, if you problem has disappeared, would you please raise your hand? Great. Good job, you guys.

Put your hands down. Is there anyone for whom the problem has not totally disappeared but has lessened? All right, let's keep our hands up. Let's hear the percentages again now. About 12% still have the problem.

We'll do this one more time, and then if it doesn't totally disappear for you, you should do it on your own until it does, or there may be timeline therapy, maybe call for it. Let's try it again. So get in touch with how you know you want that. And again, for everyone in the room, the knowingness may have changed since you may have let go of a certain level of it, but there may be other knowingness or other ways of knowing. Get in touch with how you know you want that.

And when you've done that, just go into Hakala, go into peripheral vision. And notice what happens to the knowingness. Pay attention to that knowingness. Okay, and then one final test for how many people has, and this is a break state again, for how many people has the problem desire totally disappeared? Great.

And for how many people has it not? Okay, so what we're at is 6%. Excellent. So those of you for whom it has not disappeared, you may have timeline therapy issues to deal with, or there may be other deeper issues that are attached to that. And I want to do, before we finish up, I want to do one more, I want to bring your attention to one more exercise, and this is for yourself only.

This is page 422. This is primarily for you. And when you see what we're going to suggest that we're going to do, you'll understand why. This particular process, it may be interesting to remove illusions created by time, space, matter, and energy. This is a...

By the way, how many people are in trance? Is anybody in trance when you do this exercise? Let's just see how many people feel like you're... Okay, good, just checking. You may have...

What? Trans? So notice that... Notice if you're in trans. This particular process is a rapid way of entering into a profound state of transcendence while waking.

It's an interesting way of achieving awareness of spontaneous realities. Here's a warning. This is a powerful technique and probably should be used only if you're a well-balanced person, well-grounded in your life. It may produce significant altered states, so before you do that, you want to know that. There have been people for whom the states that were produced were altered and very, very significant.

This is primarily for yourself. If you choose to use it with a client, you probably should talk to them about what the possibilities are, and they should have gotten rid of a fair amount of negative emotions, and they should also have a good reality strategy. Do you know what a reality strategy is? A reality strategy is knowing what is real, and we'll put real in quotes because, you know, who really knows? But this person should have a reality strategy which you and I would probably recognize as them being, shall we say, relatively sane.

You do not have permission to teach this with others and you should use it only after you've cleared all the negative emotions and limiting decisions. And I just want to point this out to you. This is a fun meditation if you're going to meditate tonight or tomorrow morning. You may want to try this. What you want to do is elicit the knowing of similar states or issues to, and this is in step number two, how do you know there's time?

And that's very interesting to do with time. Or how do you know you are you? Which hits at Gregory, this is the first thing we talked about, first thing in this training, by the way. This hits directly at Gregory Bateson's, what's the greatest nominalization there is? I.

So this goes right at that and denominalizes it. Turns me back into a process. Or how do you know this? And then pick any object in your awareness. How do you know this is a glass of water?

How do you know this is a table? How do you know this is a tree? And have fun. Access it. Repeat the process several times until you can, until you no longer have the knowingness and then sit and meditate in that state of expanded awareness.

The caveat is that this is a very powerful technique and you want to make sure you're grounded before you actually do that. What a fun day. You know where we went? We went all the way from submodalities today, all the way into neurological drivers, and all the way into the neurology, all the way into drivers, and then all the way beyond that to a process for expanding consciousness and expanding our awareness. This has been kind of fun.

This has been kind of a fun day. We looked at some stuff that was pretty heavy, heavy duty, and we've actually gone through, and I think these techniques will be useful for transformation. What I'd like to ask you to do is to give me some feedback should you choose to use these, both for yourself and for others. If you get the opportunity, just send me some feedback. You can send me the feedback.

You can send me feedback, and you can say feedback on Hakalau. Send it to, if you have electronic mail, send it to mind at aloha.com, and I would really appreciate that. We've been using these techniques for a while, and they're really neat, and we continue to develop the processes and techniques. And as I mentioned, again, they fall into the category of not always being a complete intervention, but I'll tell you what, if you get into a negative state yourself and you were thinking, gee, I don't want to go talk to this person or whatever or whatever, and you're feeling a certain way, you can certainly go into peripheral vision, let go of that, and go into that meeting, or go into that, go into whatever you're doing, totally in control of your state. So this is, I think, really, from my point of view, this is the ultimate in state control, and future pacing state control.

Okay, so what are we going to do next? What we're going to do next is we're going to have a fun day tomorrow. We're going to have a fun day of some presentation stuff. For those of you who are in our accelerated practitioner, you already know what one of the exercises is. It's a fun exercise.

And we're going to actually learn how to, let's see, we're actually going to learn how to become aware of the tempo of our voice, and that's a fun one. We're also going to learn some presentation skills and some issues around, some basic issues around training design. And then before the end of the day we'll actually get into modeling and probably sometime tomorrow we might have a breakthrough of sorts. So if you haven't had your board with you, then bring your board tomorrow so you won't be when we have our breakthrough. Okay, make sure you're not bored, but you have it with you, because that's important.

So, this is a segment on presentations, presentation skills, presentations. And the question is, what in the world do you want to do during a presentation? What would you do during a presentation? I need to tell you, the first time I ever got up and did a presentation, well, on NLP even, and I remember the first time I ever did it was with a little computer store in Honolulu called Data One. Data One Computer Center had, at this point, two or three stores.

And so they brought all their salespeople in and closed the store, and they brought in the NLP expert, Tad James. And so I came in and taught them NLP. At least I thought I did. Well, by the end of the weekend, actually it was just a one-day Saturday, but by the end of the day, I think I got some negative feedback. Actually, there were 21 people there, and I got 18 out of 21 negative feedbacks on the feedback form.

And three people said, if you bring Ted James in again, we're going to quit. And I thought to myself, oh, no. I'd better do something. I'd better do something. And I This last trainer's training was made, let's see, about 11 years.

We've been teaching people how to be trainers now. And I think that we've done really good at it. So I'd like to share with you some possibilities, some thoughts about some things you could do. I'd like to share with you certain things and certain ways of actually doing trainings and certain things you can do while you're working with your students in order to assist them in gaining greater trance states. I'd like to not so much demonstrate training possibilities in this segment, but as to talk about them.

And then we're going to do a few exercises. We'll do some exercises which we actually do during our trainer's training, which are a lot of fun. There's about, I think, I would say there's about, I started off, you know, not knowing what to do in doing a training. And then I began to figure that I ought to do something, so I did something. Anything.

One thing, particularly. I did one thing, and that worked so well, I did two. And then three. And then four. And then five.

And then seven, yeah, seven. And then eight, and then ten things, and then twenty things, and then thirty. Well, there's actually thirty things on page four. Fourteen. What I'd like to suggest is that from moment to moment, there are lots of things that one could do in the process of doing a training.

And I'd like to, if I may, mention a couple of them. Because I think that what you'll find is quite interesting. Probably very important in terms of you as a trainer, I mean. Being able to create certain states in your students, in your audience, and so forth. To put it another way, I think that if one speaks to the unconscious mind, I don't mean you and your unconscious, particularly, but if one begins to speak and honestly talks in a certain way, one could begin to use certain states and certain ways of doing and saying things, which were not immediately obvious.

At certain points, if you wanted to make certain points, one could, and I don't mean dis-a-point-ing, you could anchor certain things. For those of you who are listening on the tapes, I'm demonstrating certain things, and from time to time I may actually write now. Do some things which were designed to sort of interrupt patterns and allow people to think differently. And I'm working with wall chart number... 14. Now, the fact is that when your student comes into class, they bring with them a conscious mind.

And they think they're there for something consciously. But what they're not aware of is they bring their unconscious mind. And of course, you guys have all been unconscious of that. Consciously, this entire training, haven't you? So what I'd like to suggest is that you can use hypnosis or hypnotic techniques in the process of training people.

Which, quite frankly, the more the student accesses certain states, and the more fun you have, obviously, the more your unconscious mind will be willing to play. And so I think not so much demonstrating that, but more talking about it from that point of view. For those of you listening to the tape set, I've actually dropped three marking pens on the floor. And the question is whether I will drop all of them. But we're not exactly sure of that just yet.

So there are about 30 things that a master practitioner class several years ago picked out that they felt that I was actually doing in front of the room, and those 30 things are on page 414. And I don't know if you've personally identified anything like that during the training or during listening to this tape set. But it occurred to me that there were some things that we could teach to students and actually install that, first of all, your unconscious could use to create altered states in students. And my point of view is that too many people try to teach the students conscious mind. Too much time is spent working with the conscious mind only.

And I do think it's important that the conscious mind knows something. Knows something. Because I figure if anyone knows, your nose. Those things at the unconscious level. Now, I don't know if you've ever been in a situation where you heard someone speak and you actually went into a trance formation that occurred deeply, a transition, as you began to translate certain words and make sense of them at your unconscious level.

Hypnotic language patterns are always useful for beginning to assist the student in making new neurological connections at the unconscious level in such a way that they can utilize whatever it is that they've learned and be able to speak about it easily without even having to think about it. I'm not going to suggest that. But if you were to use certain techniques, which were hypnotic. Hypnotic, I think, would be the word. Hypnotic.

Have you ever made a presentation and dropped a pen, by the way? Have you? Yeah? Did you ever worry about it? I don't.

I really don't. Because, you know, the truth is, if the students are in trans, it doesn't matter what you do. Because they'll read your mind. You know, and they'll sort of finish the sentence for you. Thank you.

I love those forced mind reads. And the truth is, by the way, that the truth is, I've got to be honest with you, you'll never run out of pens. Because even if you do, you always can write with anything that's available. And they'll be able to see it. So presentation skills.

What's up with that? Presentation skills. By the way, I wrote the word hip, for those of you listening to the tape, in green ink and then nuh in red and then finished it off with a hot dog. This is a particularly plump hot dog. We're blessed that the hotel had sort of these kind of implements for writing.

Because if they didn't, well. So I think when you're making a conscious, unconscious presentation that probably you ought to teach both the conscious mind and the unconscious mind at the same time. It seems to me that when I look at the big picture of what I do personally, what I want to be doing is I want to be installing behaviors with students in positive states. Have you guys laughed at all during this training? No.

Not a bit. I don't know. So much learning in the world isn't a lot of fun. And so, well, you know, fun's one of my highest values. You guys figured that out already, right?

We haven't gotten to values yet, but I'm sure you were able to do that elicitation. I'm sure your nose, those things. You have gotten the fun, yes, without having any values yet. Just kidding, John. Just kidding.

So I think installing behaviors in positive states and transforming beliefs on slide 111 and integrating the material both consciously and unconsciously is where I am at personally. I don't know where you're at, but personally I want to do a lot of things like that. And so I think the best way to do that is with... What is... Which number is that? 14, no problem.

What does that say? Hypnotic, right. Is there an underline under it? Yeah. Okay, good.

Just checking. What is that? Also anchoring, is it not? Because, I mean, you can see that, can't you? I mean, you're not in trance right now.

You haven't been in trance this entire training, but you can see that, can you not? So, where do we start? What do we do? This is the end of tape 16, side A.