# Mbti, Metaprograms

To change someone, I've never, to be honest with you, I've never had an extrovert come to me and ask me to be more introverted. So, I've never had an extrovert come to me and say, I'm too extroverted, can you help me be more introverted? I have had introverts come to me and say, can you help me be more extroverted? Typically, the process that I'll use there is timeline therapy, and what we'll do is get rid of any limiting decisions that there are with regards to meeting or being with other people or hanging out with them or feeling comfortable or safe. Those are typically the intervention for assisting an introvert to be an extrovert.

Okay, the next is timeline therapy and probably there is a limiting decision in the past or there could be some, an event which would relate to feeling safe about being with people, or being okay to be out there, you know, etc. Okay, internal process. I've had people come and ask me for both, to change both of those, and that's hierarchy of ideas. So have them do the chunking exercise that we did, where, remember on the tape set, where you had person A, B, and C, and person C tells person A how to, whether to chunk up, chunk down, or chunk laterally. We did a demonstration on that on the tape set.

Thinking and feeling relates to whether it's, it actually relates to values. So probably the way to go in on that one would be values. And you'll have to look at what's important to the person and what they want to accomplish from that. So that would be essentially changing values in the hierarchy. And judge or perceiver is simply in time and through time.

And the judge or perceiver is simply in time and through time. So did you all get those? Anybody want any of those repeated? Just change the timeline. And in the book Timeline Therapy, the cocaine therapy in the back of the book, that was the major intervention that I did with him.

And I actually did Myers-Briggs testing beforehand and afterward. So he came to me and he was a 45 perceiver. And I shifted his timeline and immediately after shifting his timeline gave him another Myers-Briggs, but just the questions on judge or perceiver. And immediately after shifting his timeline, gave him another Myers-Briggs, but just the questions on judge or perceiver. And immediately after shifting his timeline, he was a five perceiver.

Immediately after, so he went from a 45 perceiver to a five perceiver in three seconds after shifting his timeline. And 30 minutes later, after we did other things and came back to the questions, he was a 31 judger. So, for example, all of these things can be very effective at shifting. And the interesting thing is that Myers-Briggs, of course, thinks that all of the Myers-Briggs stuff, all of these things are cast in stone. And the fact is that they're not.

From the NLP point of view, what we're interested in is change. So personally, I don't think we'd even be concerned about these basic metaprograms unless we were able or felt like we knew how to change them. And I think in NLP, our interest is how do you create change with a person? And that's my major interest. One more thing I want to mention in this regard, and that is how do you work with somebody who's a judger if you want to assist them in purchasing something?

And that's called the judger close. We used to use this a lot in business consulting because the truth is that most of the people that we met were judges. We're looking at page 3-3 and slide number 122. They have the same information on them. So if you're listening to the tapes, you can probably just go with page 3-3.

And what we'd say to the client is, Mr. Jones, you know there's a right way and a wrong way to do everything. Joel, you understand this, right? There's a right way and a wrong way to do everything. Joel's nodding his head yes.

And the right way to purchase our consulting services is, and then the first time through you go dissociated with the person. So you say, what one does is one does a needs assessment. And then one might receive a proposal from a prospective consulting firm. If it worked, then if the proposal was acceptable, then of course one might accept the proposal and go ahead and write the check for the fee, and then we'd switch to associated. And you can feel good about, in this case it says making a good purchase, but we would say you can feel good about setting up a consulting relationship that will really work for you.

And then you say to the client, now let's see where we are in this process. Okay, so you go through, one, two, three, dissociated. Then you say, and you can feel good about, in this case, in the example here on the page three, three, you can feel good about making a good purchase. And then this time we go through all associated and we say, well, let's see where we are. So you'd say, okay, let's see where we are.

Well, let's see, we've just done a needs assessment. And what I'd like to do is get back to you with a proposal. And once you've accepted the proposal, you can go ahead and make your first payment on our retainer. And you can feel good about putting together a consulting relationship that will work. And what's interesting is that the judges have such a high need for closure that usually they'll draw themselves through to the close once you lay it out for them in order.

So once you lay it out for them in order, they'll usually draw themselves right through to the close, and they'll be, in essence, wanting to go ahead and do it. So that's the judger close. It's actually quite useful. Does that make sense, Joel? Joel's sitting there nodding yes.

He likes it. Joel is switching to perceiver as we speak. Oh, well. All right. I want to go back and just close up one other loop, which I sort of had not completed, which is on page 3-2.

And that is, remember I said that if a person is a judger, then they emphasize either thinking or feeling. And if they're a perceiver, they emphasize sensing or intuition if they're an extrovert. Okay, we're looking at page three, two. So in the Myers-Briggs, what we have is we've got four boxes, and the four boxes are the four, like E-S-T-J or I-N-T-P or whatever. If the person is an extrovert, so if the person is an extrovert, which is at the top here, then if the client is a judger, and I wrote the little J there, then this function will be dominant, which is the thinker or feeler.

And if the person is a perceiver, then this function will be dominant, which is sensing or intuition. If the person is a judger, then that will be dominant. If the person is a perceiver, then that will be their dominant function. Dominant function means they evaluate their external world based on either their thinking or their feeling. What's the fourth one?

ESTP. This is extrovert, introvert, sensor, intuitor, thinker, feeler, judger, perceiver. Okay? So if a person is a judger, which is the J above, then that's going to relate to either thinking or feeling, which is in the T and the F is inside the box, or if they're a perceiver, that will relate them to sensing or intuition, which is what's inside the box. Okay?

With me so far? Okay, now, this is where it gets interesting. Let me see if I can explain this in a different way. Let me stick with extrovert for just a minute. A person who is an extrovert will evaluate their external world with what judging or with what J or P points to.

And an introvert will evaluate their internal world based on what J and P points to. So with regards to what's their primary outward function, an introvert will, if a judger, an introvert will look at the external world with their sensing or intuition, and a perceiver will look at the external world with their thinking or feeling, and this is with regards to the external world. Now, what's interesting about this is so that the introvert's dominant function is not turned outside. The introvert's best function is turned within. So they evaluate the external world with their second best function, which will be one of these middle possibilities, which is either sensor-intuitive or thinker-feeler.

So that's the rest of the story of the information on page 3-2. Okay, let me explain this again. Let me see if we can explain it one more time. Then we'll take some questions. Wall chart number 17 is in regards to the external world.

Okay? If you want to know what happens with regards to the internal world, it's the opposite of this. Okay? Now, so let's just concentrate first of all on the external world. So with regards to the external world, the extrovert, if a judger, which is what the J means here with the arrow, will be using his or her thinking or feeling to evaluate the external world.

And if an extrovert is a perceiver, he will be using his or her sensing or intuition to evaluate the external world. With me so far. If an introvert and a perceiver, then this person will be using their thinking or feeling to evaluate the external world, and if a judger will be using sensing and intuition to evaluate the external world. Which means that the introvert uses their least preferred function to evaluate the external world. But it also means that the extrovert uses his or her least preferred function to evaluate the internal world.

Now, it's just the opposite of this with regards to the internal world. This is why if someone's a high introvert, they could have a preference that makes their actual, who they are, seem different from what they are. Because someone who's an introvert may not score, may not seem who they are on the Myers-Briggs. In other words, someone who's highly introverted may be using a least preferred function to evaluate the external world and so may not appear to others to be that way because it's the least preferred function. So they may exhibit the opposite type when they're relating to the outside world because the introvert prefers to relate to the inside world.

The way a person would appear opposite is if they had a high score on the introversion scale. Okay? So let's just do a concrete example. So let's, at the bottom of wall chart 17, let's take someone who is INFP. Okay?

So what this says is this person's introverted. They're an intuitor, feeler, perceiver. Okay? So someone who is an intuitive perceiver is going to be evaluating their external world with their thinking or feeling. In this case, our example is evaluating her external world with her feeling.

Okay? And evaluating her internal world with her intuition. So someone who's a perceiver is... so someone who's INFP, so the perceiver is evaluating with sensing or intuition. But the perceiver is evaluating internal worlds. So the perceiver is going to come off, an intuitive perceiver is going to come off as not seeming like they're an intuitor because they may come off as, they may appear to the external world as someone who is a censor or a thinker or even possibly a judger, depending on the numbers, because of the introversion, because of the introvert, is skewing all those to the other side.

Because someone who's an introvert is using all of these things to evaluate internally, so may seem like they are different from who they are. So an introverted intuitor may well appear to the external world like a censor, but really doing it toward the internal. Does that make sense? This is not a full course on Myers-Briggs. A couple things about courses on Myers-Briggs.

There are weekend courses you can be certified to do Myers-Briggs, but you're going to have to be a psychologist, psychiatrist, MFCC, PhD, et cetera, or a business consultant. We became certified in Myers-Briggs through being business consultants. But, I mean, I think there's enough in the book Please Understand Me by Kiersey and Bates, and you can use that test if you want to give it to your clients. I found it very valuable in terms of looking at people and telling people who they are in relationship to other people. So let's talk about that for a moment, because I think that's also one of the real important things about how metaprograms and also the Myers-Briggs as a set of the four metaprograms work.

So someone who's an extrovert, someone who's married to someone who's an introvert. So the extrovert says, no, so the extrovert says, boy, I'm really burned out. I need to recharge my batteries. Let's have a party. And the introvert says, I'm burned out too.

Let's be alone. And the extrovert goes, be alone? What? Another one of my favorites, and by the way, I use this all the time when I work with couples. Another one of my favorites is censor and intuitor.

So the husband's an intuitor, the wife's a censor. Could be the other way around, but we'll just, for grins, we'll say it that way. So the husband's an intuitive, wife's a censor. Husband goes to work, comes home, wife says, how did it go today, dear? He says, fine.

She says, what'd you do? He says, same thing. And she goes, well, like what? Well, you know, I had a pretty, I mean, the day was about the same as it always was. I went to work, came home.

She goes, and he says, and then just because he's interested, he goes, and what did you do today, dear? And she said, well, at 8 o'clock, I got up, got the kids off to school, and then I, you know, got, picked out the right pair of shoes, and I think by about 8.30, I was ready to go. I went, and then I went, and by this time, he's gone. Because he's already got more information than he can possibly handle in terms of getting the ideas between them. So he's off and running, and then she says, well, you never listen to me, and you never talk to me.

And the fact is, if each one were to learn how to give the other the palatable information, then it would be just fine. So if each one could learn, yeah, well, this is how much information you need, this is how much information I need, then certainly, then that would work. For example, in a business setting, a business manager might say, how are we doing? And the business manager is the intuitor. The bookkeeper, who's a censor, might say, well, this client's paid us, this client's paid us, this client's paid us, this client's paid us.

And by the way, the manager's already over the top now. And this client's paid us, and we have these bills to pay. And the correct response that would work probably very well for a manager like that, and by the way, this describes me in my business relationship with my company. The correct response probably would be, we have X amount of money in the checkbook and all is well. Manager goes, fine, that's good.

On to the next subject. The intuitor needs a lot less information and grasps the relationships between them. Thinker and feeler is pretty easy to understand. I'm sure you all have run into people who you felt were uncaring or unfeeling. Too logical, too reasonable, too rational.

Not into their feelings enough. That's a standard sort of problem in relationship discussions and counseling. And then with regards to judger and perceiver, of course, there's the lateness issue. The husband who's a judger, the wife who's a perceiver, husband comes home, he says, we're going to go to dinner at 8, dear. She goes, fine, no problem.

He arrives at 8, he's ready to go. Where is she? Still combing her hair. She gets done by about 8.20, 8.25, and by now he's freaked. And she goes, but I had to look good.

And I'm ready. I'm almost on time. It's like, why are we laughing? So Myers-Briggs is very useful in telling people about each other and how they would respond to each other, especially in a relationship setting or in a business setting. With regards to being a master practitioner and doing this, on the Myers-Briggs, are we allowed to use those?

And you say you use those only if you're certified? Clearly, as master practitioners, you cannot order the Myers-Briggs. You must be a medical doctor, psychiatrist, psychologist, MFCC. This is a training in the Myers-Briggs, but it's not a complete training in the Myers-Briggs. Usually they have, usually the workshop's a couple days.

And you need to be a psychologist and be trained in statistical methods or some other sort of similar thing. You could be a business consultant and get certified. The Myers-Briggs, of course, would love to have you be certified in it. And if you're a business consultant, that certainly is one way to do it. You probably should have had some courses on statistics and statistical design in order to qualify as a business consultant for that.

But the book, Please Understand Me by Kiersey and Bates, will do exactly the same thing for you if you buy that book. It's a black book with a silver title. In the back of that book, there is a test which you can use with your clients called the Kiersey-Bates Temperament Something, Sorter Temperament Index or something like that. And you can give that to your clients. Probably unless you were licensed, you probably wouldn't, or a business consultant, you probably wouldn't get certified.

Although we have had people, as a result of this course, go get qualified by the Myers-Briggs organization. But you have to have some other qualifications, too. You could also subcontract a Myers-Briggs person to administer the test. Okay, let's move on to metaprograms. Metaprograms are kind of fun.

You guys have read the book. I don't know if I need to spend a lot of time on metaprograms, but what I'd like to do is give you, I'd like to give you the benefit of my experience. We put together this metaprogram and values inventory when we were doing business consulting. We actually successfully used this in hiring as well as personnel selection. That was part of what we did when we were doing business consulting.

I think we were very, very successful at it. We actually had a number of real wins which I'd like to talk to you a little bit about. So what I'd like to do is go through and give you some additional ideas to the reading, additional ideas to what you've already read in the book, Timeline Therapy and the Basis of Personality. If you haven't and you're listening to the tapes, please stop the tapes now, get the book, and read Section 3 of Timeline Therapy and the Basis of Personality, all about the metaprograms. And in addition, I'd like to add for your consideration three additional metaprograms.

This will be the first time we've actually taught these metaprograms. So you guys get the benefit of having three new, which I think are really majorly fun, hot new metaprograms, which we'll go through and see what they do. All right. So let me just see if I can add a little bit to what you read in the book. And I think what I'd like to do, too, is if there's any questions on each metaprogram as we go through it, then you can ask if there's any questions.

Okay, so the first is the direction metaprogram. And what you're doing is you're looking for a listing of values. You're looking for a listing of values. We will get to values elicitation. In this case, we don't need to be overly precise.

We do want to ask the client to give us as many values as they can. And you may want to write them down as you get a list of values. You may want to write them down. Or, depending on whether you're doing a fast elicitation or a quick elicitation, depending on how much depth you intend to get into, then getting the values probably will be really useful at this point. My experience was, personally, that once we put together the metaprograms and values inventory and began to use it with clients, that it was extremely, extremely useful.

In fact, I remember one time I was sitting talking to the personnel manager of one of the banks in Honolulu, and she was sitting there like this, of course, with crossed hands. And I made my presentation for business consulting with her for about 45 minutes and absolutely no change. Matching and mirroring everything I could think of to do and nothing happened. And so I said to her, you know, it occurs to me that I'm not really getting through to you so let me ask you some questions, may I? And in eight minutes I did an elicitation of 16 metaprograms and then I spent the last 45 minutes telling her who she was in greater depth than she'd ever had anyone understand who she was before.

That was a real significant moment for me. And so these metaprograms are, number one, very, very useful in looking to see and discovering who a person is and how they'll react in certain situations. Actually assisting a person to be able to literally, or assisting you to be able to literally understand who the person is that you're working with and what their preferences are, and in many ways being able to predict behavior. So the first thing we're going to get is we're going to get some values. We're going to end up with some values.

A person will have a certain number of values, and depending on the depth or quality of the elicitation, the values will either be toward, they'll be toward with a little away from, they'll be both toward and away from equally, away from with a little toward, or totally away from. And I think that your, and I'm going to demonstrate this eight-minute metaprogram elicitation here shortly, and then you're going to have the opportunity to do that. But I think that y'all are, I think, at least I hope you are, and let me ask you if you are, pretty well seasoned at recognizing the difference between a toward statement and an away from statement. But let me just define them. And this is really the issue.

Someone who is giving you a toward statement is telling you what they want. Their focus, remember we talked the first day about focus. The toward person is focusing on what they want. And the away from person is focusing on what they don't want. So someone who is giving you a toward value will tell you what they want, and someone who is giving you an away from value will tell you what they don't want.

That being the case, then the person who is giving you an away from may also give you some additional linguistic markers that should be a tip-off. One of them is a negation. So anytime you hear a negation, I don't want this, I want to not, blah, blah, blah, that's going to be immediately a red flag for an away from. And another marker, which is less of a marker but also something that you should be aware of, is a comparative. So anytime you hear a comparative deletion or any other form of a comparative, then you could be tipped off that an away from exists.

So those are the two major things. Comparative like more, most, least. I want to have more fun. I want to have less. Well, more fun is a tip off because they're comparing it to something of not, and we don't know what.

But it's something which is not something. Right? So more, most, least, best, worst. Those are all comparatives. Anytime you hear a comparative deletion, it's another tip-off that there could...

A comparative deletion does not necessarily signal an away from, but could signal an away from. Okay, any questions about that? Great. This is the end of Tape 20, Side A.