# Prime Concerns, The Null Set

So, page 249 is the elicitation. And here's what we do. We're also on slide number 80. You want to ask the first two questions almost in a row. The answer to the first question is not significant from the point of view of prime concerns.

That is to say, the reason for the first question is to light up the neural networks. But in terms of it being a prime concern, usually if a person's best at something, that's not going to be what needs assistance, or they don't need help in that area. They're going to need help in the area that they're worst at. So the first question, when you say to the client, what you essentially will say to the client is, what are you best at, starting things, changing things, or stopping things? Ask this question to yourself for just a moment.

What are you best at, starting things, changing things, or stopping things? Think about it for just a minute. What are you best at, starting things, changing things, or stopping things? Think about it for just a minute. What are you best at?

Starting things, changing things, or stopping things? Just make a note of that. And I'm interested in the room here. So how many people are best at starting things? Would you say that's what?

More than half the room? Three quarters? Okay. How many people are best at changing things? Whoa, that's the other three quarters.

No, that's a quarter, right? And how many people are best at stopping things? Whoa. Three people. Four people.

Okay, great. So this is good. This is good. Now, once you've elicited that for the client, you don't stop there. You just go right on.

And what are you worst at? Starting things, changing things, or stopping things? So think about that for a minute. What are you worst at? Starting things, changing things, or stopping things?

Let me get a percentage here first. Everyone got it? So what are you worst at? How many people are worst at starting things? Okay.

Like 4%. How many people are worst at changing things? Well, that would make sense, wouldn't it? Let me see. Wait, wait, wait, wait.

Probably 8%. And how many people are worst at stopping things? Okay, the rest of the room, which is about 90%. Yeah. Okay, now, if you just raised your hand for, if you just raised your hand for worst at starting things, the question is, and we're going to question number three, so what is it that you're not being that you want to be?

If you just raised your hand for worst at changing things, what is it that you're not doing that you want to do? And if you just raised your hand for stopping things, what is it that you're not having that you want to have? And ask yourself that question. The answer to that question will likely point to a prime concern. Do that now.

If you're listening to the tapes, do that now. If you need to stop the tapes right now and think about it for a minute, stop the tapes, reread the question, and make sure you get an answer before we proceed. We're going to discuss it here right now. So, if you're, if you're worst at starting things, what is it that you want to, that you're not being that you want to be? If you're worst at changing things, what is it that you're not doing that you want to do?

If you're worst at stopping things, what is it that you, that you're not having that you want to have. That particular thing is going to give you one of your, or could point to a prime concern. Those of you that have come up with a prime concern, is this a major issue in your life? For how many people, let's just do a show of hands, for how many people is what you came up with with the answer of what is it that you're not being, doing, having that you want to be, do, have, how many people is this a major issue in your life? Raise your hand.

Okay, well, let's put your hands down for a minute. Is there anyone for whom what you came up with was not a major issue? Okay, yeah, that would be 4%. So that's a pretty good elicitation. How many people didn't come up with anything they were worst at so they came up with nothing? 10%.

Okay, so what we've got then is about 15% of the people didn't have anything come up as a result of these questions. In terms of a questioning technique, that makes it a pretty powerful technique. If you can get to 85% of the people, you're looking at a very core issue in their life with three questions, I would say that's, if you're doing core issue stuff, that might be worth asking. Okay, that's the first part of the elicitation. Want to do the second part?

Great. Here's the prediction, page 250. We already went through those. And let's look at page 251. Before you actually read it, why don't I elicit it with you?

Yeah? So, if you would, please, what I'd like you to do is I'd like to ask you to remember a time when you were totally ecstatic. Can you remember a time when you were totally ecstatic? Can you remember a specific time? Would you do that now, please?

As you remember a time when you were totally ecstatic, what I want you to answer is, what was present in that state that's not usually present in your normal state? What was present in that state that's not usually present in your normal state? And write down those words that you get. Why don't you? If you're listening to the tapes and you need to stop the tapes right here, do it.

Go ahead and write down the words that you need to, the words that come up. Remember a time when you were totally ecstatic. Go back to that time. Remember that time. And the first part of the question is, what's present in this state, as you remember it now, what's present in this state that's usually missing or that's usually not present in your life?

What's present in this state that's usually missing in your life? If that doesn't get you any words, then let's ask the inverse of that question. What's missing in this state that's usually present in your life? Okay? Stay in the ecstatic state.

First question was, what's present that's usually missing? Second part of the question was, what's missing that's usually present? So in this ecstatic state, what's missing that's usually present? And if you get some words, write them down. Yeah?

How many people got words? How many people didn't get words? Anybody? Fabulous. Okay, so 100% of people got words.

Of the people who got words, when you look at the words, are they major issues in your life? Yeah? For how many people are the words you got not major issues in your life? Maybe 25% were not major issues. So the second technique got us an elicitation of 75%.

That's good. That's excellent. Right, not every client will respond to this. The rest of the clients you'll have to just sort of notice. So what are we looking for?

In the ecstatic state, we're not really looking for the ecstatic state. We're looking for the non-merrimage reverse of the static state, which is what's present that's usually missing or what's missing that's usually present. The elicitation questions are on page 251. On page 252, there is a little box that you can use for writing those down. Yes, question.

What's present that's usually missing? And then what's missing that's usually present. So you're actually looking at what is the difference between the ecstatic state and the current and the regular waking state. And then you're going back and forth between the two of those to discover what's missing that's usually present and what's present that's usually missing. So you're looking for the non-members reverse of the difference between the waking state and the ecstatic state.

Yeah, what's present that's usually missing. Actually, the words are on page 252, which make it very simple just to look in your little box there and to write them in. Okay, you with me so far? Yes. Sure.

We're going to go back to the first solicitation. The thing that really confused me was the second question. What are you worse at? Starting things, changing things? Well, let's do it together.

I mean, the word changing, and then you said it meant maintain. No, no. Changing means opposite of maintaining to me. Not exactly. Because in the maintenance, things have to change and go on.

So let me just ask you the question. I don't know. Okay. So what are you best at? I thought it was changing, but it's not maintaining.

Okay. So what are you worst at? Starting things, changing things, or stopping things? What are you worst at? Starting things, changing things, or stopping things?

Maybe starting. Starting things. Yeah? So what is it that you're not being that you want to be? Anything come up?

Working. Working. Career. Is that a career? So you haven't been able to create a really good career for yourself?

Not now. Yeah. Okay, so is that a prime concern for you? Yeah, it is now. Okay, that's really it.

It never has been, though. It is now, though. Yeah. Yeah, okay. Yeah, so did you get any words when we did the ecstatic state?

Uh-huh. Yeah, okay. Are those issues for you in your life? Now, yeah. Yeah, okay.

Okay. So, I mean, I think prime concerns is in the now. Yeah. I mean, I think we deal with the stuff we deal with in the now. So can these things change?

Oh, yeah. Sure, sure, sure. Absolutely. It seems to me that there's stuff that's missing that we deal with, and when it's dealt with, then it's not missing anymore. Then it can come back, huh?

Then there's nothing more to do, yeah. When it's dealt with, it's not missing anymore. Okay, yes. I was a little unclear about stopping things. Does stopping things mean like pooping out when you started them, or does it mean like in a positive sense knowing when to stop?

Here's what I do. Whenever I do elicitations and a client asks me that sort of thing, I don't answer the question. Okay, thanks. What I would say to the client is... What would I say to the client?

What does it mean to you? What does it mean to you? So let me just ask you. Are you best at starting things, changing things, or stopping things? What are you best at?

I said starting things, but pooping out is pretty good, too. Okay, great. So what are you worst at? Starting things, changing things, or stopping things? Probably changing things.

And what is it that you're not doing that you want to do? Not doing that I want to do. Things in a career sense, things in where I live. So are those concerns for you in your life? Yeah.

That's really the purpose of the questions. Okay, the first thing I wrote down in response to what you just said on my paper was everything, and then I realized there's no place to chunk up from everything. So I had to chunk down. Good point. So you got it.

That's really the only purpose. When you get information, you'll get information from the client. You'll get information from the client. The client will give you some sort of information. When you get the information, boom, you then have a prime concern, or you may have a prime concern.

What we're going to say is like, for example, in our class here just now, with the first question we got 75%, no, 85% people had a major concern in their life. And by the way, I'm indebted to the Rig Veda for those, and also the Bhagavad Gita for those questions. And then the second set, the ecstatic state, gave us 75% issues with people's concerns. And I'm indebted, by the way, just as an aside, I'm indebted to Steve Andreas for the notion of the ecstatic state. And that gave us a 75% response.

So typically, my experience is, by the way, that I'll ask both questions to a client and one of them may or may not work. But usually with one of them, I'll get a prime concern or two or some with a client. And usually they're different. Different people will respond to at least one of those. So there's also a third way of eliciting, which is in the monograph, Prime Concerns, the little book that I wrote, but I'm not going to cover it here, because the success rate is much, much lower than either of those two.

Okay, so we've got Prime Concern. Let's look at page 253, because what's next is what to do with it. Oops. Because I figure if you're going to bring stuff up, you might as well handle it with the client. So here's our little overview.

We're looking at page 253, and we're also sliding it on slide 84. So the first thing is to gather information with regard to the presenting problem. I want you to know that in what I do currently when I'm doing a detailed personal history with a client, which is the same detailed personal history that we're all going to learn in our Master Timeline Therapy training segment. And for those of you listening to the tapes, it's on the Master Timeline Therapy tape set, which I would recommend. When I'm doing the detailed personal history, I will also ask those questions about prime concerns.

Because I will tell you what. If you can leave, if the client can leave your office in the state of what the ecstatic state is, you will always have a satisfied client. So if you take out the prime concerns of the mirror image of the ecstatic state, or if you take out the prime concern of what's missing, being, doing, or having, you will leave with a very, very, very satisfied client. So it's really, really a powerful set of questions and one that I, I can't say that I always do anything, always. But what I can say is that this is so successful for me that I do it a lot of the time enough so that I would recommend that you do it.

That was easy for him to say. Okay. So we gather information regarding the structure of the presenting problem. And we use starting, changing, and stopping and ecstatic state. And as we do this, we're going to listen for significant words or words which are analogically marked out.

We'll listen for those words and then we'll test the words. Step number three is we're actually going to test the words and feed them back to the client and see if the neural networks, step number four, and see if the neural networks are activated. What that arrow means on page 253, that's you finding your way into the center of the prime concern and then activating it. You did this the day before yesterday. You did this with all of the little quantum linguistical patterns that we showed you.

You guys know how to sit there and calibrate. You've done it before. I've watched you do it. You sit there. You calibrate the person.

You're looking at them. You notice when the neural networks are activated because each step of the way, because you guys had such really great success with that. And oftentimes, when those networks are activated, the client's going to go, what? They're not actually going to be able to comprehend what you're saying when you're ready to generate a new pattern. So what you're going to do is generate a new pattern in one of those quadrants, which is either the inverse, the converse, or the non-Mermidge reverse.

Depending on the prime concern, it may not lend itself well to the non-Mermidge reverse, or it may, in which case we'll generate it in the inverse or converse, and then generate a pattern. And the pattern you're going to generate is going to be non-merge reverse inductive. And then you're going to go back and forth across the threshold or across the boundaries. How many times? Until the problem disappears.

But it could be three or seven. I've never really had to do it 21 times, ever, with a client. And then what happens is you'll get resolution. And when the resolution happens, the problem disappears, the client can't hear you. If it's parts you're working with, the parts will integrate, the boundaries will disappear.

And what happens technically from a quantum linguistical point of view is the capacity of the words to act as a linguistic marker to pick up that state, the capacity of those words disappear to do that. The words will still be words, they'll still be there for you. But, but the capacity of those words to act as a linguistic marker disappear and then you test in future case. Okay, you ready? I'd like to demonstrate this.

Okay, so I need a volunteer. Okay, come on up, give her a hand. You ready? Yep. Okay.

I'm ready. So let me ask you a question. Are you best at starting things, changing things, or stopping things? Starting things. And what are you worst at?

Stopping things. So what is it that you don't have that you want to have? Success. Okay. And how do you know that?

Because I don't feel that I have that. So you don't feel you have success. I mean, occasionally. And what would you feel if you had success? I would have...

Success. You'd have success. Okay. Does this sound like a prime concern? Interestingly enough, do you notice how she's not really doing well expressing what it is?

Oftentimes, prime concerns, especially if that's what's missing, it's going to be hard for the client to express themselves on that issue. Remember I said one of the things you notice with 253 that you'll get a client, or actually I mentioned it earlier, was that the client will maybe give you a lot of what they're feeling or a lot of what they're doing will be vague and inexpressible. That's kind of what it feels like. Excellent. So what's missing is success.

How is that a problem now? That's another one of my favorite questions, by the way. It's a problem. It is a problem. Yeah.

Okay. All right. Let me ask you another question. Okay. Do you remember a time when you were totally ecstatic?

Yes. Do you remember a specific time? Yes. Great. Can you go back to that time and tell me, when you're in that state, what's missing that's usually present?

What's missing in that state that's usually present in your normal waking state? What's missing from the ecstatic state? Humdrum. Humdrum is missing, okay. I don't know what that is.

That's great. That's great. What's present that's usually missing? Wild success. Say that again?

Wild success. Wild success. Lots of energy. Okay. Okay, so we did two elicitations, and both of them have the word success in them.

So I think we can pretty well say that success is a prime concern, plus Sun's inability to express herself on this issue. Okay, so let me just ask you again a question. Back in the ecstatic state one more time, what else is missing that's usually present? What's missing that's usually present? It knocks me out of the ecstatic state, thinking about it.

Can you compare the two states? Yeah. So what's missing that's usually present? Darkness. Dimness.

Not dark. Dim. Okay. That. Okay.

Buzzingness. Okay. What is it that prevents you from having success? Do you know? Fear.

That's what comes up? Uh-huh. So, what are you afraid of? And I'm still gathering information, by the way, just simply looking for words that would be useful. Doing it wrong, doing it bad.

Okay. So, let me just suggest something. As you're about to generate the new pattern, what it says on page 253 is have the client fully consider the pattern. They don't necessarily have to respond to the pattern. They just have to fully consider.

So I'd like you to fully consider what I'm about to say. And what I'd like to suggest is, and I hope that, I hope I'm not doing this wrong. And that is that anything less than really experiencing the lightness or the light of who you are is not success. Anything less than experiencing the light of who you are is not success. And Sun is, by the way, now gassed and is now considering something inside herself where she's had a couple of color shifts.

Could I repeat what I said? I opened up the neural networks and I said, I hope I'm not doing this wrong. That was part of her prime concern. That was what was preventing her. But I did a not on doing it wrong, so I hope I'm not doing it wrong.

And then I said, anything less than, now we're doing a non-membrane reverse inductive language banner, anything less than totally experiencing the light of who you are is not success. Non-memory reverse inductive language, Benny. Okay, son, let me ask. Are you done? No, she, you're, yeah, you're.

I think so. Well, let me ask you a question about, because now we want to test in future pace. Let me just ask you a question about your success. How do you feel now about your success? Is it possible?

Mm-hmm. Whoa, that's congruent. Yes. Totally. Yes.

Now, as you imagine yourself in the future, you know, in a time in the past when you might not have felt that you could be totally successful, how do you feel now? I feel very good. Good. That's good. With the light in my eyes.

When you said light, that was very cool. You set that up. Yeah. Actually, light was probably one of her prime concerns. And where did we get that from?

The ecstatic state. And I said, what was missing? What was missing is usually present. And she said dimness. And she said something like there's a lot of light in the ecstatic state or something like that.

Well, you know what helped was when you said, can you compare the two? As opposed to getting somewhere, then I could put them out there and compare the two. Right, right. And it was very clear. Cool.

Yeah. Cool. So how do you feel now? I feel really good. Good, good.

All right. Give her a hand. Thank you. Yeah, thank you. Good job.

Now, here's the thing about prime concerns. It isn't always a complete intervention, but it certainly will loosen up the client's model of the world sufficiently, and it is brief therapy. In fact, it's quite possible that it's... I don't know how long that took, but it wasn't very long. It is quite possible that it would be an intervention that one could do very, very quickly that would allow the client to make major shifts and the problem could disappear.

Or, it's also possible that you might have to do other interventions with it, like timeline therapy. Let me give you a couple, by the way, there is a complete transcript of intervention that I did with a student in the monograph of Prime Concerns, but let me give you a couple of other examples of interventions that I did. One of them was, this is really interesting, one of them was I was doing some consulting for a non-profit organization in London, and the standard objection that they heard when the people would go up to the door and ask for money, you know, this was a non-profit organization that did door-to-door solicitation, right? So the people who were on the streets would go up to the door and they'd ask for money from the clients, or from the people they were soliciting. And the biggest objection they heard was it's not possible to give money to every good charity that comes to our door every year asking for money.

And typically the person soliciting the donation would go, oh, okay, I'm really sorry. Too bad. And they'd leave, right? So the solution we came up with using prime concerns is, so the client would say, so the client would say, it's not possible for us to give a donation to every good charity that came to our door every year asking for money. So what the person soliciting would say is, oh, good.

First of all, that throws the person off right away. Oh, good. So if you found one good charity pointing to themselves, then you couldn't not give your entire yearly donation to us. Couldn't you? And then they would step out of the way and say, besides, I'm not asking.

Hold out the bucket. It's for the children. Murray's ready to go back and go door to door. Lawrence, he's packing his bag. Lawrence, okay, buddy.

See ya. Nice of you to stop by. No, the training's not over yet. Hang in there. Okay, so you want the objection?

Okay, you got the objection. The objection is, it's not possible for us to give a donation, a donation, to every good charity that comes to our door every year asking for money. The solution is, oh good. So if you found one good charity pointing to self, then you couldn't not give your entire yearly donation to us. Couldn't you?

Comm, and besides, stepping out of the way, leaving a spatial anchor, holding the bucket out, pointing to the side, and besides, I'm not asking, it's for the kids. So it totally displaces resistance. And turned out to be a reasonably decent answer for them. Turned out to be a reasonably decent answer for them. There is a transcript in the monograph called Prime Concerns, and you may want to follow up and look at that.

And have some fun with this. Have some fun with this. I would say to, first of all, add this in your interventions. At least you could take the two major questioning techniques, the starting changing things and stopping things. and the ecstatic state, and add that into your upfront detailed personal history or the questions that you ask the client. That's going to give you a lot of information with a very, very few questions.

It's going to give you a lot of information about the structure of the deeper level of the client with a very, very few questions. There's just one more thing I'd like to cover before we complete prime concerns, and that's the null set. I hesitated to share this with you guys, but you guys are really a great class, so my sense is you're going to use this ecologically. This is an extremely powerful installation of a null set. You know what a null set is?

It's something that doesn't exist. We're looking at page 254. The null set is something that doesn't exist. What happens if you ask the client to consider that which is unspeakable or unthinkable? The client will enter into the void, will they not?

Right? This is a very, very effective technique for assisting the client in entering into the void. And if you anchor this state, you can drop a lot of unwanted material into it. So the way it goes is you're talking to a client and they're telling you something about something, whatever it is, whatever subject. Maybe they're telling you about the presenting problem.

So you say, tell me more and tell me more. And you say that until the client has told you everything that he or she can think of. And usually for most clients, my experience is that's about 45 minutes. I mean, usually if you talk to anybody about any specific subject, they'll be done in at least 45 minutes to an hour. I promise you.

So you just sit there and listen. You may even take notes, because if you're doing it therapeutically, it's a note-taking thing. Once you're all done, then you say to the client, if you're driving a car, you do want to stop the tape now, I promise you. You really do. You really do want to stop the tape if you're driving a car.

Pop it out. Really pop it out. Okay. So at that point, then the client's told you everything they can think of, and then you say to the client, what is it that you haven't told me that you're not thinking of right now? And you anchor that.

So think about this for just a minute, if you're listening on the tapes and if you're not driving a car. What is, tell me, just think about it right now in the room. What is it that you're not thinking of right now? Welcome back. So that's the prime concerns null set, and it's useful.

It gets you to a space of sort of non-existence. We're looking at slide 88, but it's on page 254 also. And if you're listening on the tapes, welcome back. And so that's our tour de force of quantum linguistics. We're complete.

We're going to move into another linguistical process, but we move now more towards strategies in our master practitioner training. That's our tour de force of quantum linguistics. I hope you enjoyed it. One of the things I'd like to ask you is to use this with some caring, use these processes with integrity, and use these processes with heart. I think that's very, very important.

This is the end of Tape 9, Side B.