# Prepositions, Chaining Modal Operators, Metamodel Iii-Directed Questions

Okay, how did that last exercise go? Welcome back. Any questions about this process? I wonder if that worked for her. For those of you listening to the tapes, we have a picture of one of our delighted clients on this.

I think. You notice the smoke coming out of her ears. Any questions about the process? Good. Good.

Like I said, the decision destroyer is something you can do like a quick fix. It works with a number of different modalities of either time, space, matter, or energy. Simultaneously, it is something that we don't have to necessarily take a detailed personal history for. And there may be times when you want to take a detailed personal history, but there may be times when you don't want to, and you don't want to go through all of timeline therapy, in which case this is a very quick sort of process. Yeah?

The question was, it seemed like there's something underneath that that may come up as well. Yes? So what you're saying is this method would not be appropriate for working with or not working with deeper level issues. I think whenever you do something like this, it's good to have the backup of timeline therapy so that if you need to, you can go handle the deeper stuff. Sometimes you can peel off or you can blow out boundaries on a decision which will then only make the client aware of a deeper level decision.

But you'll notice with Matthew, as I did in the demonstration, he did something that we decided at birth. As long as we got back far enough, that was fine. Anytime you do anything where you go beyond boundaries, there is a possibility that you may bring up stuff which the client themselves had not considered before. And when they consider that in a new light, it may be problematical for them, in which case you may have an additional intervention to do. Anytime, when you do anything, really.

I mean, even just talking to somebody at a restaurant, you could say, you know, geez, how long have you had that problem? And they go, blah. You know, or, when was your first, and it's just an innocent remark, you know. But, so, I mean, I think this is a fine thing to use, and just knowing that it's in the category of what I would call oftentimes quick fixes. Quick fixes, you can get the job done quickly, you can change a decision, you can assist the client in doing that, and you may need to go to a deeper level, and you know you may need to go to a deeper level, in which case you'd use timeline therapy for that.

Right? Yes. In my case, I started to cry. And the facilitator interpreted that as meaning I was in a terrible space, but never asked me. What it meant to me was that for the first time I considered there was a before.

And that did open up a space. I didn't come up with any ideas what it did, but really, I mean, and that was emotion being released. And I guess what I was going to say is it might be a good idea. So the practitioner, the master practitioner, to consider that you were in a bad state was obviously doing a mind read. It might be just good to ask, what are you feeling?

Oftentimes when I have a client who does that, I'll say, you know, like, what are you feeling? Or what's up? What are those tears about? And if the client says, no, they're really good, then that's great. A lot of times clients react that way and do that.

And I think to say, oh, the client's in a bad state is not necessarily so. So that's good. Okay, any other questions or comments about the process? Yes. In our group, when I was working as a practitioner, I had help.

The help came. And what had occurred is I hadn't really gotten the full state disassociated. It was pointed out that there was a little bit of a change, but not really a true change. And so at that point, we just said, okay, go back to that point just before you were there, and what were you deciding? Right.

And then I used audio, too, in order to shake that whole frame because he stayed so much in the associated state of that limited decision. And that really opened the bag for me because at first it just looked like, just do the steps very quickly and sometimes you can just stay at that number three a little bit and be sure. It's possible to do them quickly, but you do have to calibrate the client always. Yeah. Yeah.

I thought that was really interesting. Good. Thank you. Good observation, yeah. You always have to calibrate the client, so that's good that you did.

And he fooled me. He was very good. I mean, he did a little bit of a shift, but, you know, of course, the staff here is so wonderfully qualified. They noticed that it wasn't a real true shift, and he admitted that he didn't really shift all the way. Well, then you have to just slap him around a little bit.

Oh, actually, he might like that, so you probably shouldn't. Yeah, that's good. So notice the decision destroyer. If we're talking about time, space, matter, and energy, notice that the decision destroyer, because of the ambiguity, where were you, can deal with state, it can deal with time, or it can deal with location. So it's really nicely ambiguous in terms of how it does that.

So it actually, although we say we're doing it time, in terms of time, could also be location or could also be state. Because where were you is also a common way of asking for state. I was, well, where were you? I was kind of like not feeling that good. So it's ambiguous in an Ericksonian way that allows the client to do whatever they do with it.

If they're being too ambiguous with their response, then you narrow in on different, I call it, modalities, you know, the different ways that... Yep. Thank you. Exactly. Okay.

So before we move on to the next concept, the next exercise, let me just ask you a question. So I want to introduce this thought right now. We're going to come back to it again several times during the rest of our training here. Did you, or let me see, how many people did for a moment when you were doing the last exercise? How many people experienced a moment or a state of where there were no thoughts, you're sort of in suspension?

Yeah. Good. Good. So I'm going to come back and talk about that in just a minute. That's what I want to talk about in just a minute.

But first I want to have a couple more, I want to have a few more experiences. See, what we're doing here, what we're doing here is we're ungluing the glue of experience. We talked about the different possibilities of glue. We talked about yesterday a little bit. We're going to talk some more about it today.

And so what is the glue of experience? Well, here are some of the things. These include, and we're looking at slide number 40. These things include time and space, which are the words technically are prepositions. Remember that there are spatial and temporal prepositions.

Just for fun, I included a whole list of prepositions on page 238. And according to the dictionary, a preposition limits a verb according to, listen to this, this is the dictionary now. A preposition limits a verb according to some circumstance of space, time, manner, degree, cause, or reason. The dictionary is already doing quantum linguistics here. What the heck?

Alright, so let's look at page 239. We took some of the prepositions and grouped them in terms of spatial prepositions and temporal prepositions on page 239. So being aware of using these particular words in your language can also, even though we're talking about linguistics, we're talking about quantum linguistics, let me jump ahead for a moment to submodalities. Because these words themselves can be useful in assisting a client in letting go of the glue that holds their submodalities together. Think about it for just a minute.

Can you think of something that you really know? And when you think of the something you really know, do you have a picture of it? Or can you have a picture? Want to play for a minute? Okay, let's play.

When you think of something you know, just think of something you know, and when you think of that something you know, do you have a picture? Okay, just nod yes when you have a picture. Great. Now, let me just ask you, aside from that, what else do you know? Now, what happened when I said that?

I actually took my hand and moved it across. We'll talk about that when we talk about how to work with people using submodalities. But something else happened when I used the word aside from that. Did anything happen to you when I did that? What happened?

My picture went aside. Your picture went aside, didn't it? Didn't it? So did anybody else's picture go aside? My head turned.

Your head turned a little bit. Yeah. How many people? Raise your hand again. Let's see, what percentage of people?

Great, your picture changed. Oh, just about everyone. Okay, let's do another one. Can you think of the thing you know again? Can you think of the thing you know, right?

Now, let me just suggest that there are other things you know. Moreover, the things you know... What happened that time? It went up. It went up, right.

Okay, here's another one. Let's do it again. Can you think of something you know? Right? What's behind that?

Okay, so spatial prepositions are kind of fun to play with. And they can allow you to do unobtrusive submodality shifts in a client, especially with regards to location. What's one of the most powerful drivers? Location. So these can assist you in doing that.

And then we also have some temporal prepositions at the bottom of the page, which I'm sure we've used to see if we can make an outline of those. So page 239. What's another thing that holds glue together? We're back on slide number 40. Nouns and nominalizations.

But what I'm interested in right now is the experience of energy and how modal operators can affect some of our rules in life. And this particular process is really disarmingly simple. It's very easy to get a sense of this. You already know it intuitively. Let's look at page 237.

This is a list of modal operators. And one of the things we've noticed about modal operators, even though in linguistics there are two kinds of modal operators that are normally discussed, which are possibility and necessity. My sense is that there's also a third class of modal operators which are in between possibility and necessity, which I'd like to call probability. I'll propose that we call them probability, and I'll propose it only in that they're not, they don't seem quite as possible as possibility. Like, you can seems to me to be more possible than you could.

Doesn't it seem that way to you? Yeah. So, I'd like to propose, I'm sure that Noam Chomsky and S.I. Hayakawa and maybe even Alfred Korzybski are going to roll over in their grave when I do this, but this works from an NLP point of view. So let me just suggest that I'd like to be so bold as to say that perhaps we can set up three classifications of modal operators, and I've sort of listed them on page 237.

We could classify them into necessity, probability, and possibility. And then, of course, we've got, I was going to say im-necessity, but that doesn't work, so we'll call it negative necessity, like doesn't allow, don't have to, got not to, it's not time, must not, not necessary. Improbability, which is couldn't, probability is could, probability is dare to, deserve, had better. And then we could do possibility and impossibility, which is able to or am not or am, can't, can, doesn't permit, permits, et cetera. And one of the things that's not immediately obvious is, now, think about this for just a minute.

If a client has a modal operator, what does that do to the client's rules in life? Actually, modal operators often form our rules. They tell us when we can or can't do something. They tell us when we should do something or when we shouldn't do something. They tell us when we have to or we must do something.

So, what I'm going to suggest is it's possible to, now, remember that we have our, the basis of all of our NLP patterns, which is essentially associate to present state, disassociate present state, associate to resources, disassociate resources to present state, and then future paste to resources. I'm going to suggest it's possible to take and chain together a bunch of modal operators that will lead a client in a new direction simply using the modal operators themselves. Simply using the modal operators themselves. And if you look at slide number 42, we're going to talk about a very simple little process. So what are we going to suggest you do?

First step is start where the client is. Use the modal operator, whatever modal operator you're doing, and then you decide where you want the client to go to. If you're familiar enough with modal operators and you decide where you want the client, obviously you want the client to end up in a modal operator of possibility. What are the modal operators of possibility? Can, I'm able to, I choose to, I decide to, I do, I intend, it's possible, a permit, etc.

So we're then deciding where we want to go. We're then going to use the client's modal operator and add to it at least one intermediate modal operator and add to that a modal operator possibility. The process is so simple that you've only got a slide for it. You don't have a page in your notebook. But you can follow along from the slide.

Slide 42. Okay, so can someone tell me... You guys want to play? So what we're looking at is energy or how. Before we were looking at time, possibly space, using the decision process, decision destroyer.

Now we're looking at how a person would do something. And the how is, these are the rules that form the boundaries of what you can and cannot do, linguistically. You with me? So does anyone have a rule that you have in your life or something you'd like to be free of? Has anybody got a minor problem that you have in your life that you'd like to get rid of that when you describe it you use a modal operator of necessity or even impossibility?

Okay, so can you give me the rule, the sort of, can you tell me what it... It's with a should. I should always be resourceful. Okay. One of the things that you should be able to realize is that it might be possible, when you think of it, that you can be resourceful at your choice.

Yeah? Now, what happens inside? What happened inside you? Now, notice we were calibrating them all so we got the nod of the head. We got a nice color shift.

Now, what do you feel about you should be resourceful? I can be. You can be? Yeah. Thank you.

Give Lauren a hand. That's good. That's great. Okay. Very simple little intervention.

Very simple little intervention. Looks very simple. We start off, chain the modal operator, emphasize it as though it were embedded command. We used his modal operator, you should. Of course, one of the things I said is you should realize hypnotic language pattern with that, right?

That it's something that, what did I say in between? You might. Where is that now? You might. That's a modal operator of probability.

It's not quite possible, so we don't want to just go, yeah, you can, because, quite frankly, it might have been too big of a leap for him. So we're taking him across the boundaries. We set up the should. We calibrate to his positive state. We then go to might as a possibility intermediate, and then we go right to modal operator of, which is you can.

Oh, you felt like you were going down a step. Boom. And you can, yeah. Yeah? Very good.

Excellent. Any questions about the process? Because we're about to do it as an exercise. It takes five minutes apiece. The people that finished last, by the way, don't work together again.

One of the things I like to do is whenever somebody uses a should, I love to combine that with should realize. So you say you should, and the client goes, yeah, realize. So it's a nice sort of opening. So what we're about to do, start from where the client is, get their modal operator, decide where you want to go. We wanted the client to go to possibility, can.

Then we use the client's modal operator. Add at least one intermediate. Calibrate the client. If the client's not moving that quickly, you may have to add another intermediate. And if the client starts way over on negative necessity, you're just going to use page 237 for this.

If the client starts over on negative necessity, I sort of look as though they come down the left side first. So it's negative necessity, improbability, impossibility, necessity, probability, and possibility. Okay? So Laurent started with should. So he started on the upper right-hand side, so we really only had to go a couple of steps.

If he'd started way over in negative necessity, we might have had to have another step in between to add in another modal operator. Calibrate the client for each step. Make sure they're with you. Five minutes apiece. Yes, a question.

If they start with negative necessity, then you might want to go either improbability or impossibility or even necessity. So, like for example, a client says, I really must not do this. And so I might say to him, well, couldn't you realize that you should be thinking about other possibilities and you can, can you not? Doesn't that just torque the Because these are all rules. These fire off all of our rule structures.

And what we're doing is we're running over the boundaries of your rule structures when we do this. Even though I'm just playing, we're kind of trampling on the boundaries of your rule structures, which is great fun. So let's do it. Five minutes a piece, that's all it takes. Get the modal operator, fire it back to the client.

Notice what happens. Groups of three, one group of four. If you're doing it on tape, stop the tape now and do the exercise. Go ahead and stop the tape. All right, welcome back.

How did that last exercise go? Yeah. Now let me just ask you a question. Did you notice that sometime before you transitioned to, or in the middle of transitioning to the last modal operator that you were working with, did you notice at some point a moment of blankness or a moment of no thoughts or a moment of suspension? Did anybody notice that?

Great. Okay, virtually everyone again. And again, I'm going to ask you to think about what is that. We'll be talking more about that as we go on. What is that blank state that occurs?

Okay. Any questions about chaining modal operators? Good, good. Good job. Let's move on to metamodel 3.

Page 2, 36. We're looking at slide number 43, and we're looking at page 2, section 2, page 36. This really isn't Meta Model 3. This is an example of Meta Model 3. There is no such, really.

Meta Model 1 was the original Meta Model. Meta Model 2 was the precision model. There was much made in NLP 10 years ago, probably, about Meta Model 3, which is essentially, Meta Model 3 is essentially directed questioning to produce a specific result. Meta Model 3 is essentially directed questioning to produce a specific result. But wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute.

Haven't we been doing that already? Yeah, okay. Okay, we've been doing that already. So when we talk about quantum linguistics, that's all of what quantum linguistics is, is directed questioning. Or we could use directed statements, but questioning are good because it gets the client to consider.

By the way, did you notice that the client doesn't have to actually answer the questions in the decision destroyer? Did you notice the client doesn't actually have to answer the questions? In Meta Model 3, what we'll notice is the client doesn't have to, doesn't have to actually answer the question either that we're about to ask the client. Okay, so let's look and see what we're going to do. And this one is sort of detailed in terms of how it works, and notice that it pretty much follows our basis of all NLP patterns on slide number 38.

So the first thing, client's got a problem, we say, what's wrong? What are we doing? Associating to present state. What caused this problem? Present state.

How have you failed to resolve this? And then number four, which, by the way, doesn't make any sense logically. How can you overcome the solution to your problem? What do you think the word overcome does now that we've looked at prepositions? Right.

Over. Right. Over. Come. The solution to your problem.

That flips it. Then you say, what would you like to change? When will you stop it from being a limitation? How many ways do you know you solve this? Now what are we doing?

We're actually, how many ways do you know you solve this? We're associating to resources, associating resources to present state, and then I know you're changing and seeing, changing and seeing things differently, actually, linguistically, future paces. This is, again, I want to say, this is not Meta Model 3. Meta Model 3 is directed questioning for a specific result. This is an example.

Anything which directed questions could be called Meta Model 3. This just happens to be the title of this page. Oh, that's what it says down at the bottom. Small print disclaimer. This is an example.

This is only an example. If this were a real test, then you'd already know about Meta Model 3. Who put that at the bottom? He was off the wall when he did that. The guy sitting in that chair.

So does somebody have a, somebody want to play Meta Model 3? Somebody have a problem? They want to share with us? Yeah, I found myself, I get intimidated easy when I'm going through some of these exercises. Yeah, what's wrong?

When I'm practicing. What's wrong? I'm feeling intimidated. What caused this problem? My thoughts.

You know. Well, let me ask you a question. How have you failed to resolve this? And by the way, he doesn't have to answer. I just want you to consider that.

How have you failed to resolve this? Okay. I don't know. You don't know? Well, think about it for a minute.

How have you failed to resolve this? I haven't thought differently. You haven't thought differently. Okay, good. So let me ask you a question.

How can you overcome the solution to your problem? Think differently. What would you like to change? How I think. When will you stop it being a limitation?

Now. And how many ways do you know you've solved this? Several, several ways, but one in particular is it's disappeared. I know you're changing and seeing things differently. Yes.

Yes, I am. Now, what was the problem? Now, we're going to go back and just test. What was the problem? What problem?

Yeah. Now let me just ask you a question because I really want you to get this. Thank you, Dan. Did this make any sense, what I said? No.

No, it didn't make any logical, reasonable, rational sense. And quantum linguistic stuff doesn't have to make sense. We're working on the boundaries. We talked about this yesterday. We're working on the neurological boundaries that comprise the problem.

We were working earlier when we did the modal operators on the boundaries, chaining modal operators on the boundaries that comprised our rule structure. Before that, we were working on the boundaries that comprised time. What are we working on here? We're working on the boundaries that comprise or deal with relationship. That is, how do we, which could be matter, or depending on how the problem is described, or nominalization, right?

So we're working on the boundaries that describe the relationship between the client and the problem. I just wanted to point that out. The relationship changes when we say, how can you overcome the solution to your problem? So we're using the preposition, the preposition of overcome, and it changes it. Ready?

Exercise. Five minutes apiece. Same thing. Got a problem? Get rid of it.

Five minutes. Ready, go. New people. If you're listening to listening to tapes please stop the tape and do the exercise now this is the end of tape five side b