# Making Magical Presentations

The question is, what's the first thing that you want to do? Probably the first thing you want to do if you really want to integrate the conscious mind and the unconscious mind is to present some information. Okay, let's look at page 414. There's about 30 things I do when I'm doing a training. I'll often sort of open loops and sort of not close them, as you noticed.

Builds an air of expectancy. Let's get on with it. That sort of thing. We can also structure the state of the students moment to moment using hypnotic language patterns and anchoring these states. One of the things I wonder if you've noticed is that you're pretty much anchored to the sound of my voice.

And from time to time that I can change the tone and the tempo and the pitch of my voice. And as I do, that you can probably experience certain shifts in your consciousness to where it gets easier and easier just to sort of settle down and pay attention to certain internal states and processes. And you're probably even anchored to my posture, because when I actually sit a certain way and just sort of settle back, you probably find yourself entering a different state than if I were more forward, using a little bit different tone of voice, using a little bit different tempo, a little bit different pitch, and moving in just a little bit different speed. And notice, so notice that from time to time, that we can actually change and begin to experience moving back and forth in different, and actually in different states. And it's just a matter of once the anchors have been set up, once the anchoring is all set, and for this training, the anchoring was all set up, if you want to go back and listen to the tapes, was actually pretty well set up in the first hour and a half to three hours for everyone in the room.

And so by this time, the anchoring of the voice tonality, the tempo, and the pitch is pretty well set. So you're able to access those states. And personally, what I do is I use the different levels of trance and different levels of state to allow the students to be able to experience those levels. And when we need this student more in trance, then they're more in trance. And when they're not more in trance, they're not more in trance.

They come out of trance, but not yet, because I want to go through some information, which will be more fun if you're just relaxed. So the next thing I do is sequence the content. Content sequencing is very, very important in a training. Each material needs to lead to the next, and that's one of the things that I'm very happy with that we do in our trainings is I think we've got our trainings pretty well sequenced. The training I'm most proud of, of course, is the trainer's training, the way it sequences people from ground zero to really full-on trainers.

Content chunking is also important, and that really has to do with what logical level you're operating at. If you chunk too big, you're likely to lose people, and if you chunk too small, you're likely to bore them. So a training always sort of treads that fine line between too little and too much information. Personally, I'll sit and look at a room and calibrate the room and notice what they're doing, paying attention to that, and then when I see that they've got enough information, then we'll just go ahead and do the exercise. Do I use anchors during the training at all?

Yeah, okay, well, we mentioned that. Have you noticed, by the way, that a lot of the patterns that you learned during this training were demonstrated before you actually did them? I don't know if you've noticed that. Of course, some people will notice that, and then they won't want to notice it. Some people would prefer that it wasn't exactly that way, or some people would prefer that it was that way.

And actually, a lot of times, you know, they may know inside themselves or they may know outside themselves. Some people may have an experience of that once and know it or twice and know it. Some people will have to see it and they'll know it. Some people will actually have to have someone tell them and then they would know that that was happening. I don't know.

Some people would like to do it alone. Some people need to do it in groups in terms of understanding that. And I don't know if you've noticed that from time to time, probably somewhere between a few hours to as much as a couple or three days, that I'll actually demonstrate on a nonverbal level the patterns we're about to teach. And I don't know if you've noticed this, but probably you could notice it if you were going to go back and listen to the tapes, is this leads to number 14, which is a feeling of familiarity. I don't know how much of the material that you've gotten into has, as you've gotten into it, seemed to be familiar.

Have you noticed a certain feeling of familiarity with the material as you got into it? How many people have noticed that? Good, virtually everyone, yeah. Good, so what that means is that we've done our sequencing correctly. So as you come into new pieces of material, by the way, what did I just do a few minutes ago, just a moment ago?

What did I non-verbally demonstrate? Metaprograms, right. Just a few moments ago, I non-verbally ran through about seven or eight of the metaprograms on a non-verbal level. I mean, not non-verbally, but I used the patterns without identifying it linguistically. So what I want you to know is that that happens throughout all of the trainings that I do, where we'll actually be demonstrating on a nonverbal level some of the material that's about to come, which gives the student a feeling of familiarity before that.

That's number six. Training states, of course. You've gone through certain states from time to time. And of course, from time to time, number eight, we actually do give you content. Whoa.

We'll come back to the format system. I'm going to talk a little bit about that because I think it's important to present information in a way that it's palatable to the conscious mind also. We also need to look at applications of the material that's been covered and from time to time we may restructure the student's model of the world. That usually happens in trainings that I do during the question and answer session, when we're actually doing questions, which is why I like questions. Some people in our field don't like questions.

I don't know if you've noticed that, but I love them. And one of the reasons why I like questions is because when the student asks a question, their conscious mind is listening for the answer, which gives me a tremendous opportunity to work with all of the rest of the other of who they are at your unconscious level. So I love questions. And from time to time, we'll work with that. We teach that in the trainer's training.

It's called questions are the answer. In addition, we'll want to link everything to the student's internal representation or to their model of the world. That's sort of linking to what you already know, which also give a good feeling of familiarity. We've used temporal language. Have you noticed that we've backtracked and covered most everything that you covered in your practitioner training?

Good. So during this training, we went back and picked up just about everything that you covered, at least in asking you to recall it, and that's called backtracking. Typically when I teach, I'll use a KAV sequence, which means we'll start slowly and move up a little more quickly and then a little more quickly. That's one of the things we teach at the trainer's training. Bonding is a process that appeals to the unconscious mind and we deal a little bit with that on our trainer's training tapes.

There's some information on there about that. I think it's important to express emotions too. I think that personally that's something I learned to work with more and more, and I think that probably the more emotion we can express, the better off we are as human beings. So I think that's also something that's good for a trainer to do. Utilization is something you probably want to do, too, as you find old concepts fall away.

Certain things are off the wall. That's perfect. Utilization is extremely important to do during a training. And for those of you on tape, one of our wall charts just fell off the wall over there and to the right, stage right end. So what I did was simply utilize it.

Fractionation. Fractionation means taking the student in and out of trance. Have you been in and out of trance during? Yeah, we won't have to talk about that. Reframing, of course.

We do parts, metaphors. Angular postures. We talk a little bit about that in the trainer's training. Angular postures are more interesting than straight-on postures for some reason. So that's also used.

Demonstrating patterns overtly. Expanded awareness or hakalao. We've spent a lot of time on that. We've used humor, stacked presuppositions and internal representations. And finally, transformation.

Because I think if we can transform ourselves during a training, that's the most important thing we can do. Because I figured I could teach. I told you this the first day, or I could transform people, so I decided to. And so that's what it's about for me. Obviously, we couldn't go over this in a short presentation skills training, but I wanted to give you just a taste.

The other thing I want to assure you is, should you choose to take our trainer's training, or if you can't attend it, you can always listen to it on tape, that all of these 30 things will be installed in you and for you, and you'll find, without even having to think about it, interestingly enough, you'll find that you actually leave the trainer's training and you're using them. So, to begin with, I figure that, and I don't know if you figured this out, but, I mean, personally, 30 things is more than you can do consciously. Did you know that? You know the old 7 plus or minus 2, right? Well, that's like 7 plus or minus, 7 plus or minus, 7 7 plus or minus 7 plus or minus.

I didn't know. 4 times 7 is 28 plus or minus 2. Makes 30. That's a lot of things to do. That's like 4 times our regular conscious state. And so the truth is that this is not something you're going to do consciously, making a presentation, doing really well at it.

It's not something you're going to do consciously. It's going to be something you're going to do unconsciously. So I want to point that out. And the exercises we're going to do today, which are a lot of fun, are mostly designed to have you have an unconscious experience of the process of getting up in front of folks. And there'll be a first, not the first, but there'll be some of the exercises we do, sort of a sprinkling of different exercises.

What I'd like you to do as you're sitting here, because I know that there's something you'd like to talk about in your life. I know there's something that you'd like to talk about in your life, and I know there's something you do talk about in your life, whether it's like the guy I met out here who's a fisherman and he talks about fishing. And you've probably got something in your life you'd like to talk about that you don't even have to think about. For some folks, like me, it could be computers or little handheld crazy little electronic devices or even NLP. But why don't you, just for the fun of it, as we're about to go into our next segment, why don't you pick something that you can talk about without thinking about it and think about it for just a moment.

And we're not going to talk about it long, just two or three minutes, four or five minutes when we do our little presentation. So let's look at page 415. It's important, even though we're using, what are we using here? Hypnotic techniques. But even though we're using hypnotic techniques, you do have to give the conscious mind some content.

There are some folks in our field who don't give the conscious mind content. And, bless their hearts, some people walk out of those trainings and go, huh, what did I learn? Great state, great time, but not sure that they got anything consciously. And so personally, in terms of where I sit on the continuum of all unconscious or all conscious, I prefer to be somewhere in the middle, to where I really feel like I'm giving the unconscious mind some really good experience and good states, and to where I also feel like the conscious mind is getting sufficient information to be able to have something to deal with or to chew on. So this particular training sequence I kind of like, and we spend a little bit of time in the trainer's training discovering how to utilize that in the process of creating or sequencing your trainings.

But let's talk a little bit about what it is. The first thing we're going to suggest is that in presenting any kind of information at all, that you want to give the students some information and explain something about what it is you're talking about. Especially if you're teaching deductively, the students will need a fair amount of what? For example, anchoring is a process of stimulus response. It came from a guy named, originally from Ivan Pavlov, who developed behavioral psychology, and essentially what it says is when a stimulus is, you know, presented to a person and they go into an intense state, that we can actually anchor that state and be able to recall it.

That's a quick what on anchoring, isn't it? Then the next thing you want to do is tell the person why. Or you could tell them why first. But, for example, have you ever wished that you could be in charge of your own state? Have you ever been in a negative state and wished you could be in a positive state more quickly?

Have you ever wanted to collapse states or get rid of states that you didn't like easily? Or have you ever wished that sometimes when you got into a certain state that you could get out of it, like procrastination, and move into a state of motivation? How would you like to be in charge of your own state? That's a real quick why for a person. That's a real quick why.

Then, the next thing to do is to do a how. And the how of anchoring is you watch the person, notice the state change. When you see the state change come up, you apply the anchor. When you see the state get to the peak, you let go of the anchor. And oftentimes you'd have the students do an exercise.

And then when they come back, you have them discuss what if. And three questions I like to ask, which you've heard me ask probably from time to time, is what do you need to tell me? What questions do you have? What did you discover from this exercise? I'll use one or all of those oftentimes after an exercise.

And then finally, I think it's important to, the entire time, number four, is to be teaching the unconscious mind. So this sequence of what or why first, and then what, and then how, and then what if, is not something that I developed personally. It's not something I can take credit for. It was developed by Bernice McCarthy, and if you look at page 416, there is just a little diagram of the format system. The format system, and this is a real simplified diagram, there's a lot of material in the format system by Bernice McCarthy.

Bernard Kolb developed the Kolb Learning Style Inventory, which is a paper and pencil instrument. There are a number of books on the format system. It's nice to read. And what it essentially says is that people learn in four different ways. Some people learn and can only learn once they know why.

How many people here need to know why before they can learn something? Anybody? Right. And then some people like to have a lot of information about it. And some people can only learn once they have a ton of information.

How many people like all, a lot of information? Tons of information about a material or something like that you're learning? Right. And then the next thing, some people need to know how to do it. Many people are interested, a lot of people are interested in how to do it.

I'm interested in what it's about. I'm interested in the content or the information about it. All they want to know is how do I do anchoring? Don't give me the theory. Don't tell me anything about it.

Just teach me how to do it. How many people like to know how? Anybody here? Right. And then finally, the what-if person.

And the what-if person likes to discover and find out all the possibilities that one could do with anchoring. What could you do with anchoring? What would happen if this happened? What happens if this happened? How many people here are sort of what-if people?

Right. Now, you may have raised your hand for more than one. You may have felt that you're more than one. But notice what is emphasized in our school system in the United States today, which is essentially what. And in some cases where there's a laboratory situation, how.

But notice that a lot of people in this room were also why and what if people. And so one of the things we recommend during a particular training, and of course in the early days once they discovered the format system, the educators thought, well let's just get all the why people in one room and we'll teach them why, and get all the what people in one room and we'll teach them what, and all the how people in one room and we'll teach them how. But the fact is that that doesn't work for people either necessarily because it's best for people to learn all the other things too. So in essence what they discovered was if you actually sequence your information in why, what, how, and what if, that sequencing it that way made it very palatable to the most number of people. Alternatively you could do what and then why and then how and what if.

And alternatively, that would be also appropriate. Depends on your intention and actually the process of how you're teaching that. So again, the thing to remember essentially is that when you're teaching, and we're looking at slide number 112 now, when you're teaching, you can begin with a why or a what in quadrant number one or two. The why person needs reasons and relevance. Oftentimes discussion works.

The what person needs more information. And if you sequence it then to the how person, you need to let the person try it out and do it. And the what if person will teach themselves and others and also will actually look for different ways to use this and different possibilities and different consequences of the use of whatever it is you're teaching. That's just a real brief summary of the format system, but if you ever have to make another presentation in your life, my guess is if you think through the material that you're about to present and think about it in terms of why, what, how, and what if, you'll probably end up presenting the information to the people that listen to your training a lot more logically and a lot more palatably for the conscious mind. And see, one of the things I think is, a lot of times when people say, oh, that person used too much hypnosis, or perhaps the students were not, or some students will walk away from the training getting a vague feeling of not having any content, this totally solves that problem, because if you give the conscious mind why, what, how, what, if, then you can use any amount of hypnotic patterning and any amount of hypnotic language patterning, any amount of deep trance work with the students, and their conscious mind will still be satisfied.

So try that the next time you have to talk about something. Now, as you're thinking, and by the way, however you get up and speak with your little group in just a moment is fine, but as you're thinking, what I'd like to do is to just have you sort of think about what it is you could present. It doesn't have to be NLP, by the way. It could be something you know well. Some of you may know how to drive a car well.

Some of you may know how to play golf. Some of you may know. But it's something you know really well, something you may have found yourself teaching other people from time to time, or something you've before. Think about that for just a bit, and we're going to do actually two exercises before that, which are designed to assist your conscious mind in getting out of the way. Because the truth is, if you're really going to do more than, how many things?

Well, five things, maybe, in front of a room. And when you stand in front of a room and look at the audience, that's at least two. The truth is, or maybe three, and for some folks it's ten, because they want to scratch but don't. That's at least two, want to scratch but don't. So now we've got four out of the way, and we're working on the fifth.

So the truth is, if you're even going to get up in front of people, the first thing to do is to trust your unconscious mind. Now, what's interesting about this process is... And I don't mean it's beside the point. He said pointing to himself. What's interesting about the process that we're about to learn is that it just follows on top of what we did yesterday.

Because yesterday we did a process where you went into peripheral vision. Yesterday we did a process where you went into peripheral vision. Today, the very first thing we're going to do in learning how to get up in front of people and make a presentation is we're actually going to learn how to stand in front of people and be in peripheral vision. Now, in case you're wondering, and I know you were wondering well wondering actually is good because that means that you're beginning to make new connections new integrations learn new things have new insights more I, more or less some new insights, which at the unconscious level should make certain connections that allow you to feel comfortable in front of the room. You remember the exercise we did yesterday, right?

Remember the exercise we did yesterday about foveal, and then going into peripheral vision, hakala, and then thinking of a problem state, and so forth. Well, this sort of follows right along from that, because one of the things that I do is I ask every trainer that I train, and as you guys know, I'm sure, this year when you do the trainer's training will be our 12th annual annual trainers training. We've trained, at this point, anywhere from 80, upwards of 80 people per year. I would say we've been doing that for the last 12 years, although the trainings have gotten consistently bigger over the years. But let's say we've trained 600 or 700 people so far how to be the exquisite trainers, and the very first thing I ask a trainer to do, the very, very first thing when I'm asking someone to get up in front of a room, is I ask them to go into peripheral vision.

I ask them to go into peripheral vision, and I ask them to do it for a number of reasons. Okay? Now think about this for just a minute. Would you... Oh, I've got to ask this first question because I want to do some statistics because this is kind of fun.

And the folks on the tapes, I'm sure, want to know because they're probably feeling the way they feel listening to the tapes. And I'd like them to know how you feel. So how many people here do not feel comfortable getting up in front of or speaking in front of a group? Anybody? Would you say 30% or 40%? 40%.

And how many people have never gotten up and spoken in front of a group? Anybody? Did you say 30 or 40%? 40. Okay. And how many people have never gotten up and spoken in front of a group?

Okay, so everyone has, but they all know that they don't feel comfortable. Great. Okay, so what we're going to do, the first thing we're going to do is to actually get up and notice that we can experience a state of expanded awareness while we're actually standing in front of some people. And I'm going to put on some music for this purpose, which will allow us to sort of get our conscious mind out of the way. And what we'll ask you to do is to just sort of come up in front of the room and go into a state of peripheral vision.

You certainly have it anchored in so if it was ever, if you ever wanted to fire that anchor or if you're going to go into and remember how it was, you can certainly call up that state and sort of be in that state at will. I'll sort of talk you into it as you do. And we're going to ask you as you are up here, I'll tell you what we're going to do in advance. We're actually, if this is you, and I were looking down on the top of your head, and we're looking at slide number 109 now, I'm going to ask you to extend your awareness out, if this is you sort of on the stage here, I'm going to ask you to extend your awareness out to the front of the room, slide number 109, so that it goes all the way, your awareness goes all the way out to the extent of the dashed lines on both the right and the left of our little person. When your awareness is expanded out like that, then I want you to take your awareness and expand it out to the farthest corners of the room.

So imagine going all the way to the slide, the top of the slide. As you stand in the room, expand your awareness all the way out to the farthest corner of the room so that your awareness is, if you look at the slide, at the top left and top right of the slide, which is a diagram of the room, right? You're standing on the stage, looking out into the audience. Expand your awareness out so that it's in both corners of the room in front of you. Then I'm going to ask you to pull, and I'll talk you through this.

I'm going to ask you to pull your awareness down the sides of the room, holding your awareness out in the two corners of the room to pull your awareness down the sides of the room and all the way around so that it's 180 degrees around beside you so that your awareness will then be extended not only in the front corner, the front left and right corner, but down the side walls. And then you're going to pull it all the way around so that it's all the way in front of you and all the way around 180 degrees to your right and left. And then I'm going to ask you to project your awareness into the back right corner of the room and the back left corner of the room so that ultimately your awareness now becomes 360 degrees all the way around you. And I want you to notice what happens, and then what I'm going to ask you to do is to get in touch with the other people in the room who you're looking at, and notice that you actually become more connected with them than you ever have before. That's the process we're about to do.

So this is a process of awareness, and if you're listening on the tapes, what we're going to do is we're going to, when we're all done with the first set of people, we're simply going to fade out the music and the tape will stop. But those of us here in the room will go on and we'll do each group of people until everyone is done. This is the end of tape 16, side B. So, if you guys are ready, why don't we get this group of people right here. And why don't you guys come on up and stand on the stage.

And as you stand comfortably on the stage there, just sort of pick a spot on the back wall to focus on. And as you focus on that spot on the back wall, just sort of go into peripheral vision and allow your awareness to expand outward. As your awareness expands outward, let it expand all the way outward. Just let it go. And let it expand all the way outward so that it's all the way into the back corner of the room on the right.

And all the way out to the back corner of the room on the left. And allow your awareness to expand out totally so that it's all the way out and fills the entire room. Now bring it down the side walls. So just bring it right down the side walls. Let it come right down the side walls.

About halfway down the room. Three quarters all the way back so that it comes all the way back to you. So that your awareness is all the way out to the walls in front of you. And all the way out to the side. And it's now 180 degrees.

And as you do that, remaining in peripheral vision, notice you can begin to pick up movement in the room. And you can begin to pick up big movements, and you can begin to pick up little movements. Just little movements, micro-muscle movements. Just big movements, little movements. You can pick up everything that happens in the room.

Now, as you do that, take your awareness and bring it around behind you so that it actually goes around to the back wall on your right and around the back wall on your left. So it's all the way around now, 360 degrees, and you are one with the entire room and notice as you become one with the entire room and you're aware of everything that happens in the room notice that you can connect with each and every person in the room notice that you can connect with each and every person in the room and that as you connect with each and every person in the room. Notice that you can connect with each and every person in the room, and that as you connect with each and every person, notice you get a new feeling of connectedness. A new feeling of connectedness. Just notice you get a new feeling of connectedness with each and every person as you do that.

And as you connect with each and every person, and you can feel really connected with the entire room. Notice that as you do that, you begin to feel pretty good about who they are. And notice that they feel pretty good about you. Did you guys notice that? Did you?

Good. Give them a hand. All right, you guys. Good job. Welcome back.

Hey, you guys are almost trainers. All right. So that's the first exercise that we do in our trainers training. That's our first exercise that we do in our trainers training. And what we suggest is that people teach in that state.

So anytime you get up and make a presentation, that'd be a good state to be in. So that's our first exercise. What's our next exercise? Okay, in our next exercise, this will develop a couple of things. First of all, you guys haven't had to do anything while you've been in Hakalau, so this will be our first exercise during the entire training where you've been in peripheral vision where you're going to do something.

What I'd like you to do is to take that little topic you thought about talking about. We're only going to talk for a couple minutes. What I'd like you to do is talk for actually three minutes about something, something you know well. It could be NLP. It doesn't have to be.

And what I'd like you to do, if you can remember, and don't even worry if you can't remember, is to put it in why, what, how, what if, or what, why, how, what if, either way. If you can't remember that, that's fine. Just get up and talk in front of the folks, and when we're all done, what we're going to do is, what I'd like you to do is to tell your group, so we'll do three minutes and then I'll time you at the end of three minutes. If you're listening to the tapes, obviously, you'll have to stop the tape and time yourself. And then at the end of that, and what I'd like you to do is to get up in front of about five people and make a little presentation on something, and doing it in the order of why, what, how, what if, but best just to do something.

So the first thing you'll do is stand up, and you'll expand your awareness around your little group, just in the same way we just did with the entire group. They'll expand your awareness around your little group, and they'll get up and you'll talk about something. And stay in peripheral vision. Audience. If you notice that your presenter is not in peripheral vision, then one or the other of you just take your hand and do this in their peripheral, just to sort of remind them to stay in peripheral vision.

So you're going to just move your hand. When you're an audience member, if you notice your trainer not in peripheral vision, just move your hand a little bit like this to remind them to be in peripheral vision. Yes. But if you notice that they're not in peripheral vision, can you calibrate the difference? When you were yesterday, can you calibrate the difference between someone being in peripheral vision or not?

Of course, the question was, can you look at someone and be in peripheral vision? Yes, of course. But if you notice them not, if you calibrate them for not being in peripheral vision, just go like this to remind them to be in peripheral vision. Wave a little bit at them. And at the end of the three minutes, just going to be three minutes, very short.

So, I mean, in three minutes, how can you say much of anything? You may not get to, you may just get to the water. You may not even get that far. But at the end of the three minutes, what I'd like you to do when you're the presenter is I'd like you to tell your group at least three things you did correct. So the feedback will be from you, or three things you did right, or three things you did that you feel good about.

Okay? All the while remaining in peripheral vision. So here's the process. You'll stand up. You'll go in peripheral vision.

You'll expand your awareness so that it encompasses your entire little group. And then you'll begin to talk about something for about three minutes. Then at the end of three minutes, I'll announce, okay, time's up. Give feedback, and you'll give feedback to your group about three things that you feel good about or three things you did well. Okay?

That's it. And then at the end, your group is going to say what? Yay! Only everybody will do that. No, you don't have to stand up.

Too soon to stand up and give them a standing ovation. It might give them too much encouragement. Get a little over the top. Okay, ready? If you're listening to the tapes, please stop the tape and do the exercise now.

All right, welcome back. How did you guys do? How did you do? Did you do good? What happened when you did this?

What happened when you got up in front of your group? Deborah. The one thing I noticed is what I had thought that I was going to get up and say went right out of my head, and stuff just came out. I just said what my unconscious wanted me to say. Excellent.

And what happened? It went great. Awesome. Good job, you guys. That's really good.

That's really good. I realized that I screwed up right away by just looking dead on at somebody, because that's the way I learned to speak to people. You look right at them. My mother said to me, too, look at me when you talk to me. There you go.

When I realized that I could go into the hookalow. Huckle-huckle-ow. Peripheral vision. That's easy for you to say. And as soon as I did that, the peripheral vision just went out and there was absolutely no feeling at all and I could see everything around and it just, boy, the words just started flowing.

Perfect. Good job. So how many people feel differently about your ability to get up in front of people now? Virtually everyone, huh? So was there anyone who felt uncomfortable about getting up in front of people for whom there was no change?

So 2% of the people, roughly, felt no change from this exercise. So that's great, you guys. Great percentage. so russell we're going to overload you one more time can we with your permission i'd like to overload you guys one more time just one more time because what i'd like you to do is i'd like you to begin i'd like you to begin to pay attention to the tempo of how you speak and this is a tempo exercise this is a tempo exercise. And so one of the things about tempo is, you know, because a lot of times you'll notice NLP trainers talking in time or tapping their foot while they talk or talking in a certain tempo or a certain rhythm. You may notice that when you talk more quickly, that's one tempo.

When you slow it down, that's another tempo. This is not the third exercise of the trainer training that we're about to do. We do this way, way into the trainer's training, like about a week or maybe a week and a half into the trainer's training. But I wanted to jump to this exercise next because it's kind of a fun one just to give you a flavor of sort of, imagine trainer's training almost done. You've done a lot of work.

And a lot of times people think that it's sort of an impossible thing to learn how to talk in time with music. But you certainly can learn how to talk in time with the music. This is a little, perhaps a little too tough to do, so we'll end that one right there. There's another piece of music, though, that's really easy to learn and talk, to talk in time with. So the first thing I want you to do when you get up in front of your group the next time is to sort of just stand there and get a feel for the music.

And the way I want you to get a feel for the music is just to sort of let your foot feel the groove. And when your foot begins to feel the groove, then talk. Talk in time with the music. There's lots of things you can say. You don't have to say specific things.

Although you could say the same thing you said before. You could say different things from what you said before. But everything you say is going to be right in time with the music as you hear it through the speakers. And you can begin and end sentences or begin and end whole thoughts as the music transitions. And if you just keep one ear on the music and one ear on your, well, forget that part, and just open your mouth and let it flow, you can get all sorts of rhythms and tempos and you can just begin to talk in time with the music and just sort of feel the groove now as you go on and talk more and more you'll get more and more into the feeling of the piece of music you're working with and you'll just just sort of get talking in that certain way as the music sort of makes you feel, and you can just feel the music and go on and on, just talking in time with whatever you hear.

There's lots of ways to do that, but this is one way, and this is one tempo and one beat. And we'll go through this piece of music first, and what you'll notice is about, oh, I don't know, after about two minutes, is it recycles. And then we do it all over again. Same piece of music. And you can just sort of talk along and be in time and in tempo with the music, and just sort of be right there.

Notice all all the while my foot's moving. So the first thing to do is just sort of get in touch with the music. Feel the beat and then talk. Open your mouth and say whatever you say. It doesn't matter.

It doesn't matter. I'm telling you, it doesn't matter. Just open your mouth. Whatever you say, it doesn't matter. It doesn't matter.

I'm telling you, it doesn't matter. Just open your mouth. Whatever you say, make it in time with the music. And just talk. And just talk.

Notice my knee's working it. See this knee here? It can't stop because it just feels the beat all the time. And then I go on. And whatever I say, it doesn't matter, right?

Okay, so that's the first piece of music. That's the first tempo. Then the second piece of music has sort of a different tempo. And what I want you to do is sort of get in touch with that. We'll do a shorter piece of this.

But notice that certain things have certain urgencies. And there's a certain tempo you can talk at in one, and a certain tempo you can talk at in another way. This piece of music has a little more urgency to me. It's a little more staccato, it's a little more quick, and you can match your thoughts to that. You can just sort of talk, feel the beat, get your foot going, and just do it.

Whatever you say, again, doesn't matter. That's the second piece of music we'll use. And then the third piece of music we'll use is sort of like, what I'd like you to think of is sort of like being... We're kind of in a piano bar, I think. This is what I see, right?

We're in a piano bar. And it's about, oh, I don't know, 4 a.m. 4 a.m. And we're just looking across at the guy playing the piano. And you kind of like sitting there, you know, and you've been there all night. And as you look across at the person, you're just going to talk to him, you know, one on one.

Just sort of, again, get that foot moving. Just feel the music, whatever it is you're feeling. When you've got that sort of tempo going, then all you have to do is just start talking. But imagine being in that piano bar, just kind of looking across at the piano player. And notice what he plays while you talk to him.

Because he's going to play certain things. And all the while, you're going to be talking in time with the music. And that'll be our third piece. So we'll just sort of talk and sort of get in touch with that piece of music. Then finally, what we're going to do is we're going to come back to our first piece of music one more time.

Just real quick. Just so we can get in the groove and finish up. Once again, you get your foot tapping. Feel the beat. You can feel that beat, right?

And then all you've got to do is,, once you got the beat going, then open your mouth and talk. Hi. How you doing? Are you guys doing good? Yeah.

And you can feel the beat too, because when you talk to people and you're in the groove, they can feel the beat, and everybody feels the beat. Okay, you guys ready? So if you would, please, just sort of stand up, go back in the same groups, and dance all the way to your group. And just listen to the music. And by the way, I'd like you to make sure at the end of each exercise that you give your group three different pieces of positive feedback about how you did.

Exactly the same as the last exercise. So we're going to do this together. If you would, just go ahead and sit down in your group. Just sort of boogie on down. Just boogie on down.

Pick one person to get started. And whenever you're ready. Oh, just a minute. You guys ready? Okay, pick one person.

Yeah, just pick one person and go ahead. Okay, you guys, first person now. Can we have the first person go ahead and stand up, please? Just sort of get in touch with the music. And here we go.

So the first thing to do is you stand up just to get that foot tapping. It doesn't matter if it's the right foot or the left foot. Either foot could tap. And how does it tap? It taps in time with the music.

So just sort of feel the beat and get that foot moving. And whenever you're ready, just start talking. Thank you. Okay, now the music's recycling one more time. Keep going, keep going, keep going.

One more time, just get in touch with that beat. Just feel the beat. Get that foot tapping. When you feel that foot begin to tap, then whenever you're ready, just start talking. Thank you.

Okay, get ready to sort of wrap up that thought. Hey, group, you can give them a little round of applause here. Good job, you guys. Okay, hey, what's next? Well, the urgency of this discussion has changed.

So we'll spend just a few seconds here getting in touch with this one. So as you notice what this sounds like, just feel the beat, and, now that you've expressed yourself, you can probably just relax a little bit. Look across. Maybe it's... The way to do this one is just sort of get in mind a time like you were, I don't know, 4 a.m., you know?

Just sitting at a piano bar. As you sort of get your foot going there and sort of feel the beat, what I want you to do is just sort of just pick up one of those eyelids, just sort of prop it up and look across the bar and have a discussion with the piano player. Okay, one more thought just to go ahead and finish it up just one more time. Get in touch with that original beat. Get in touch with that original beat and just sort of feel the music.

And as you feel the music, once you get your toe tapping, then just start talking. Just start hand. Hey, good job. give your presenter a hand. Hey, good job. Give your presenter a great big hand.

You're definitely in the groove. Okay, tell your group three things you did well. Three things you did well. Tell your group, three things you did well. And then go ahead and switch.

All right, welcome back, you guys. Let me just ask you a question. How did you do during that last exercise? Did you do good? Who has some comments?

What questions do you have? Do you think this exercise, by the way, had other purposes than just having you talk in time with the music? Do you think the trainer's training is fun? You bet. So what comments do you have?

The one thing I really noticed is that everyone in the group was just really pulling for that person up there to succeed in this. I mean, they were up there and we were right there with them. You were totally supporting them, weren't you? Yes, absolutely. And by the way, that's our experience of all the times when people do presentations in all of our trainings.

That's absolutely the experience. The group absolutely pulls for everyone, especially during the trainer training. It's really like that. So that's really good. So you guys already have an experience of that.

Excellent. Good, good, good. That's really good. That kind of brings the group together, doesn't it? Yeah.

Definitely. Is that bonding the group together? Yes. Oh, yeah. Okay.

Good. Whoa. Whoa. One of the processes. Any other questions or comments about this?

We're going to leave presentation skills here momentarily and go on to modeling. But I wanted you to have some examples of what we do and just some of the exercises we do. We did a sprinkling. We did our first exercise. We did our...

Let me see. No, that was not our second exercise. The first exercise we did was from the first exercise in the trainer's training. The second exercise we did was like down the road a day, I think, or so. And then this third exercise was about a week, maybe 10 days into the trainer's training.

So you've got a little sprinkling of some of the exercises and what fun it can be. Trainer's training is really transformational. And of course, I think NLP trainer's trainings are the best in terms of transforming people as well as installing certain things. So let's see. I think probably what we'll do is we'll get ready for modeling, so we'll just take sort of a second or two to do that.

This is the end of Tape 17, Side A.