# Eyetracking, Synesthesias

Okay, so for strategy elicitation, here's the news. You probably should have also, in addition to memorizing page 813, you probably should have also memorized the eye patterns. Yeah. Shouldn't we have? Yeah.

Probably should have memorized the eye patterns. So let's talk about the NLP eye patterns. The NLP eye patterns have been a subject of much interesting debate outside of NLP. The psychologists of the United States Army decided that eye patterns, the NLP eye patterns didn't actually work and they published, I would say, a book that was about an inch thick refuting the issue. And that was because, if you look at me for just a second, that was because when they asked the generals in the Pentagon what color their house was, the generals in the Pentagon went like this, down to Auditory Digital to repeat the question, then they went up to visual to find out what color their house was, and so the Department of the Army decided that iPads were not useful because the person didn't always go to visual.

At least that's my understanding from reading that particular book. Well, in fact, you do have to notice if the person's repeating what you said. You do have to notice what the person's lead system is. You remember from your practitioner training, the lead system is how they access information. You do also have to know what the person's primary rep system is, which is the predicates, and how they put those out.

Let's talk about these eye patterns for just a moment. First of all, one of the things in NLP is that eye patterns are for others. The first thing that you need to learn about eye patterns in NLP, if this is the first time you've run across them, is that they're for others. The least beneficial thing you can do is to try to figure out what your eyes are doing. Because I've seen people do that, and it'll take you a while to figure that out, and I wouldn't even bother.

So the first thing when you come across the eye patterns is to just take them as they come and notice that they're for someone else. So the rule of thumb is, as you look at the slide, number 94, notice that the NLP eye patterns are, first of all, easy to remember because they're in alphabetical order. Construct comes before recall. So across the top, it's visual construct, visual recall. Across the middle, it's auditory construct, auditory recall.

That's easy to remember. So it's VAK down the left side and VAAD down the right side as you look at someone. In my experience, it's the easiest thing to do is to find out how people move their eye patterns. One of the things that some people try to do along the way is they try to look for exceptions to the eye pattern. So if you're one of the people who likes to look for exceptions, let me let you off the hook, okay?

Here's how I'm going to let you off the hook. I've been eliciting eye patterns since 1984 with people, and in every single practitioner and every single master practitioner class that I've had so far, someone has come up to me and said, hey, I've found someone who doesn't have these eye patterns and also who doesn't have a reversed set of eye patterns. That is to say, I found somebody who has normally organized eye patterns on the top and reversed eye patterns on the bottom. Okay? And I want you to know that in every single class that I've ever taught, someone has come up to me and said that.

And these are the people who are looking for exceptions to the eye patterns. Now, let me just say that I don't really know if eye patterns are real or not. But I do know that when I get someone's strategy and I feed it back to them in the order and sequence that I've observed, that is, utilizing, then usually what happens is the person will go into a certain state, whatever state I've elicited, and whatever state they're going into. Like, if I've elicited the strategy for motivation, then they'll go into a motivated state. So, looking for exceptions to the eye patterns only does one thing.

It makes the eye patterns which you have elicited useless. Okay, so I'd like to propose, first of all, that it doesn't matter whether eye patterns are real or not as long as they produce some results. Now, the other thing is, and my experience is, and we're going to actually do an exercise right now so we can determine whether or not your client is normally organized or not. And the first thing I'd like to do, and also whether or not there's some glitches in the eye patterns or not, whichever, and we'll find out how that's going to happen here in just a minute. What I'd like to propose is that you look for either this organization on slide number 94, or you look for an entire reversal of the eye patterns, which means that entire chart is mirror image to what it is.

That would mean that the visual recall, auditory recall, auditory digital are down the left side as you look at the person. Visual construct, auditory construct, kinesthetic are down the right side as you look at the person. And like I said, I've watched people look for exceptions to these eye patterns and find themselves not using eye patterns for two or three years. So I want to free you up from having to do that. And I also need to say that since 1984, I have not found a single person who didn't have either normally organized eye patterns or reversed organized eye patterns who didn't also have trauma in their past.

So some clients, so let me show you how that might work. So let's say you said to the client, can you, do you have a favorite beach? And they went, yeah. Can you remember walking on the beach, the cool, wet sand? And the client goes over to the auditory digital site.

Whereas normally, whereas so far, they did visual construct up and to the left as you look at them. They did visual recall up and to the right as you looked at them. They did auditory construct horizontal and left. And they did auditory recall horizontal and to the right. And yet, when you got down to kinesthetic, they went down and to the right-hand side as you look at them.

And you'd say to yourself, I found a person that doesn't conform to the normal eye patterns. If you ask this person, is there any trauma in your past, my guess is you're likely to find out there is. So here's the theory, and we're going to do an eye-tracking test right now. So actually what happens is, and Robert Dills is one of the first people to point this out, that the quality of our life is based on the quality of our synesthesias. So you all remember what a synesthesia is from your practitioner training.

A synesthesia is a two-step strategy or a strategy where we have a visual external and get a something or some kind of an external and get some sort of an internal off of that. If there's any glitches in the movement of the eyes in a certain direction, then we're not going to have that accessing be as smooth or as easy for the client to do. So what I want to do is test tracking. And one of the rules of thumb is some people have reasons why the eye tracking may not go into a certain quadrant. I'm going to explain this in just a minute or give you some examples, but let me explain it.

So let's just say that a younger person had nightmares at night when they were a child. And they would get up in the morning and they would recall the nightmares to their parents and tell them about them. And the parents would say, well, just don't make pictures like that. So maybe the child then decreased the use of visual construct or visual recall. Such to the extent, by the way, and I've actually had clients who I said, put your eyes up into this quadrant, and the client would say, I can't put my eyes up there.

They're so weak they won't move up there, or it actually physically hurts when I try to put my eyes up into that quadrant. So you may find a client who's got some sort of either minor or major trauma, possibly, or just even a well-meaning adult telling a child, don't make pictures in your head, or a well-meaning adult telling a child, oh, don't construct those sounds in your head. I had one client that had used to hear, you know, we're all nuts when we're kids, right? I used to, my room used to change size, but I don't know what yours did. But I had one client who used to hear voices under his bed when he was a kid.

He used to hear, like, bad old things talking to him from under his bed. And his parents would just say, well, don't do that. Don't listen. Don't have any voices in your head. And so eventually what happened was he figured out how to do it is he shut off his access of auditory construct.

To the extent that when you asked him, and actually this client actually also shut off his visual construct, to the extent that when you looked at him, he would not move his eyes horizontally to the left or even upward to the left because A, they were too weak, and because B, it didn't feel good to do it. So I want you to know that in that case, you could get a client whose eye patterns didn't look like they were normal. But in fact, they are normal. It's just that there was some sort of something in the past that happened that caused them to de-emphasize an eye pattern or to use a portion of the eye patterns a little bit less. So that's the first thing I need to say about eye patterns is that since 1984, I have not found a single person who wasn't normally organized or reversed organized, unless they had some sort of well-meaning adult who said, don't do that, or some sort of trauma, or some sort of not wanting to access their feelings, or some sort of something that kept them from accessing a certain part of the eye patterns.

And what I want to tell you is that's normal. In fact, there's a whole process, Francine Shapiro, some of you actually asked me about this particular process. Francine Shapiro, I met Francine at the Erickson Congress in 1992. Francine Shapiro invented a technique called EMDR, which eye movement desensitization and retraining. And actually what the client does is move the eyes into certain positions, accessing a certain memory, and then moving the eyes around, and actually the memory is depotentiated by the movement of the eyes.

Francine very nicely has limited that technique so that it's only taught to licensed personnel. So it is not available to someone who's unlicensed, and she makes the people who she trains sign nondisclosure agreements. So EMDR is strictly a clinical technique at this point. On the other hand, probably what happened is that Francine discovered eye patterns, and we did this, and I haven't actually talked to her about this, so this is totally conjecture on my part, but that she did the eye-tr tracking exercise that we're about to do, and then just to see what happens. And when she did, she discovered that some things could release from it.

So, a couple things. We're about to do an eye tracking exercise so that you can see if your eyes track easily and smoothly throughout all the way around the entire circle of the head, of your head. So, what we'll do is, I'm going to try to describe this for those of you listening on tape. What we'll do is you'll actually hold your finger or two fingers out in front of the client, maybe at about two feet, and you'll actually move your hands around the entire, all the way around 360 degrees, and notice if the client's eyes can follow your hand. So the client's eyes should be able to follow your hand all the way around, and the client will tell you, oh, this feels a little, or if you notice a glitch where the eyes actually jump over a certain place, where they actually don't move smoothly, or where they don't go into a certain quadrant smoothly, you may find that there's an emphasis there, or actually a lack of emphasis, or a lack of ability to access a certain place in the eye patterns.

So what you're going to do is the eyes are going to follow the tracking, or when you're the master practitioner, you'll hold the fingers and have the client track around. You also want to track the diamond, so horizontally across, across visual construct. So you actually will go visual recall to kinesthetic, visual construct to auditory digital, visual recall to auditory digital, and all the way around, actually. And then, so you're going to go back and forth and across to check the diamond. That's the exercise we're going to do momentarily.

But I want to take some questions about eye patterns. Those people who have some sort of inhibition for reaching one quadrant or another, can they get it back? Sure, just exercise. It's eye exercise. If there's some trauma in the quadrant, and there may be, then we'd have to use timeline therapy to get rid of the trauma.

And then eye exercise to strengthen the muscle. It's simply an inability of the client's muscles to move the eyes in that certain direction. I'd read that a common eye position was to stare straight ahead with the pupils dilating. Actually, I'm not really sure about the pupils dilating. Let's talk about that other possibility.

Usually when someone has information right on the surface, they'll simply defocus their eyes and recall that information. So defocused eyes are not necessarily visual, although some books say they are. In my experience, defocused eyes are recalling information that's right on the surface. So someone could recall auditory by just simply, I don't know if you've looked at, if you've ever watched musicians, but I've watched some musicians, and when they recall sometimes a song that they know real well, they'll just defocus their eyes. They don't have to go over to the auditory and pick it up.

So my experience is that the defocusing of the eyes is either visual, auditory, or kinesthetic, or something that is right on the surface. Plus, some people who have a look-to-talk rule, which we'll talk about when we get into elicitation, some folks who have a look-to-talk rule are very good at picking up information without having to move their eyes around. So somebody with a really strong look-to-talk rule is going to give you very little, may give you very little eye pattern movement. Have you seen, if you work with a client who has trauma, you do timeline therapy, you clear that, are they then able to access that quadrant that they hadn't accessed? However, maybe their eyes are too weak to...

They should be able to access the quadrant without it being traumatic for them. However, the muscles themselves may be weak, and so the eyes may not access that quadrant as easily. And then the key is to do eye exercises. Is left and right angler are the same movement for the eyes? Yeah.

Generally, let's talk about it. These eye patterns right here are for a normally organized person, and it's usually a right-handed person. Although, some people who are right-handed, who were made to write right-handed when they were kids, are really reversed organized. And so their eye patterns will be reversed, but they'll be right-handed. And most people who are left-handed have reversed eye patterns.

Except for some people who are left-handed have normal eye patterns. So what we call them is normally organized and reversed organized. Normally we could just call them right handed and left handed eye patterns, but they're not that. Because there are exceptions to that. And one of the reasons would be if you're left handed being made to right, right handed as a kid, but you'd still have left, you'd still have reversed eye patterns.

What does it mean, Tad, when a person goes from left to right and their eyes jump in the middle meridian, they kind of jump over? I don't know. Who does that? A fellow I work with. Whoa.

Yeah. Does he access, is he accessing straight up or what? Well, what he does is he's over here and... It looks like auditory, right? He's in auditory...

Yeah, he's in auditory... Recall? Recall, and then he goes over to construct, and his eyes jump, and then they go over to... To auditory construct? Yeah.

Maybe he's making a picture on the way by. Really? Yeah. Oh. I mean, where do his eyes jump to, really?

Does he jump halfway? It goes up like a little bump. Yeah, does he go up half..., is it right in the middle or is it on the right? It's right in the middle. Huh.

Well, then I would say he might be accessing, he might be hitting visual construct on the way by. Okay. I mean, I don't know, I haven't seen him, but it's possible that he would go pick up just a quick picture and keep talking about it. Okay. Yeah.

Why would somebody who is totally right-handed at everything, so they weren't made to write right-handed, be reverse-organized? It's a matter of brain dominance. So some people are right-handed but still have reverse brain dominance. So whether or not the eye patterns are normally organized or reverse-organized is usually a matter of brain dominance. So it's are you right-brain or left-bra brain dominant?

And mostly, not always, but mostly the people who are normally organized are organized in the normal way of brain dominance and most people who are reverse organized are organized in the reverse way of brain dominance. I don't work too much with brain dominance because it's not really something that's necessarily useful in terms of anything I can do with it, per se, from an intervention point of view or from a change point of view. But the eye pattern, that's the reason for the eye patterns being either normally organized or reversed. Sun. Just one more quick question.

For someone with trauma, people with trauma in their past, they don't necessarily, they are not necessarily not able to access certain things. No, not necessarily, no. And the trauma may be something as little as an adult looking at you and looking at you funny could be trauma for some people. You know, like, making a face at you and you go, whoa, I'll never make that picture in my mind again, you know. And some, I mean, I've talked to people who did that, I mean, just boom, and they would never make a picture again, you know.

No, I mean, when you're a kid, what do you know? When you're two, you know? And for other people, trauma could be real big, and then they could still access. So there's no necessary relationship, except that some people, in order to stop, for example, and let's look at each of the quadrants and why we would stop doing it. For some people, if they're making up bad pictures in their head, they might stop accessing visual construction.

If they're recalling bad pictures they don't want to recall, they might stop accessing visual recall. If they're making up bad sounds in their head, they might stop accessing auditory construction. If they're remembering bad things that were said, they might stop auditory recall, and if they're remembering bad feelings, they might stop accessing kinesthetic. And I don't know why somebody would stop accessing AD. It doesn't make any sense to me at all.

I really had a thing with this eye pattern, and when I was young, I had a muscle turning my eye, right? Oh, wow. So from the time I was maybe four months old to the time I was two and a half, I had the operation to correct it. See, that would be during the arborization phase, too. I saw two images.

Cool. One was real. One was illusion. So I kind of go down the middle. Yeah.

And if I can brush and feel which one's the real one, because, you know, your bottle, your food, you kind of want to get to it. Yeah, I felt that way. So, that answers so many questions why, you know, and people, when they try to do my eye pattern, they don't see me switching. Okay, here's the deal. Linda's eye patterns are weird.

Get that up front. They're very fast, but I do realize I switch now. Yeah. Can I force that a little bit more so I can broaden maybe? Force what?

Well, you know, go into the eye patterns a little bit more so I can kind of... Oh, eye exercises. Sure, sure, sure. You can do eye exercises and really get your eyes, you know, moved into certain quadrants. It would be really good.

I think eye exercises are good for everybody. Yeah, I really do. You know, there's the Bates method of vision correction written by Mary Corbett, for example, which was written in, I don't know what year, does anybody remember? Huh? 40s? Something like that.

You know, she says you'll never need glasses if you exercise your eyes every day. Think about it for just a minute. Think about it for just a minute, because we're going to get into eyesight, not right now, but in just a bit. Think about it for just a minute. It's like, I don't know what eye doctors do where you live, but where I live mostly, because I went to an eye doctor when I was in college.

It was when I needed glasses, and he put me in glasses, and then he said, and you'll probably need to, what, come back? And then he said, and then when you reach the age of 40, I think it sounds like everybody's got that, huh? We'll get you a dog. We'll get you a what? A dog!

But think about it for just a minute. It's like, and this is a great analogy. Think about it for just a minute. It's like you went, what would happen if you went to a medical doctor, you broke a bone, and he said, we're going to put you in a splint for the rest of your life. Well, that's what happens when you're putting on glasses.

The eye doctors... See, in the 1800s, you know what the eye doctors used to do in the 1800s? They used to take the prescription and make it weaker and weaker over a six-week to a six-month period until the eyes corrected themselves. Totally and completely. Now what do they do?

They say, oh, you have to come back in six months and get your prescription made... Stronger. So what happens is the current situation is that they're making it stronger and stronger. And contacts aren't any good because they block the... Even if they're gas permeable, contacts block the...

They block the oxygen from the eye, which causes the eye to be weakened. But there's good news because my youngest son is now getting corrective contacts, which you're supposed to wear only for six or eight months. And then, of course, they are extremely expensive, as usual. But he supposedly is just going to wear them for a short time, and they'll correct his eyesight, which is kind of neat. Well, the focus today is to get the glasses in such a way that it is sharper than the vision would be if you had good vision.

And so your eye doesn't have to do anything. It goes, hey, no problem. So it does get weaker. Right, now think about this for just a minute. What do eye doctors also tell you?

Don't strain your eyes, right? Now, if you wanted to have your body be really weak, what would you do? Not work out. If you want to have your body be really strong, what would you do? Work out.

And you'd really work out, wouldn't you? All right, so let's do this exercise. This is a really simple exercise. It's like five minutes apiece, maybe even less. Groups of three.

Take your finger and run it around the entire 360 degrees of the client's eyes. Watch and make sure that the eyes are tracking smoothly as they go around. If there's a glitch or a bump or a place where they don't access, mention it to the practitioner. And then you can also ask the practitioner, is there any trauma there that you might know of or whatever. Just you want to see, and I think this is a good exercise for your clients too when you're doing strategy work.

So this would be the first step that I would do. I would simply ask them that question. Okay, so quick exercise. If you're doing it on the tapes, please stop the tapes and do the exercise now. Stop the tapes now.

Okay, welcome back. How did eye tracking go? First of all, let me just look at percentages. How many people found their eyes didn't smoothly track? I'm interested in percentages.

It would be about 20%. 20% of the room found that the eyes didn't smoothly track. Okay. I was just wondering if the problem, the tracking glitch was around auditory and you're also having trouble with your hearing. Could it mean that there is a trauma blockage? I would say that the problem with your hearing is probably related or could be related to the accessing, the inability to access.

Which would be interesting if you learned how to access that, that you would, maybe your hearing would clear up. That would be, like, really exciting. So why don't, just for fun, why don't you do some eye exercises tonight and then report back to us about your hearing each day. And we'll put it on the tapes if it clears up. Because that, you know, one of the theories is, one of the theories, actually I think it was Robert Diltz who said the quality of our life is based on the quality of our synesthesias.

So if you're not synesthesia-ing out of the auditory in the first place into the ears, I mean out of the ears into the internal representations of it, that could be part of the problem. And it may not be the only problem, but it certainly could be part of the problem. So do some eye exercises in auditory. That would be great. Excellent, excellent.

Then we'll find out. We'll have a little research project right here on our stage. Yes, son? One of the things we noticed up here was there was very clean eye tracking. However, whenever he went to auditory construct and kinesthetic, he could go over there, but he wanted to turn his head, so he'd do this.

He finally held his head, and he could still track, but you could watch movements in the neck and hear that he wanted to turn so bad. It was just these two quadrants. Interesting. I don't know what that means. Who's the client?

So what was that about? Why did you want to turn your head? Do you know? I don't know. It's just like an automatic.

And you don't want to turn your head the other way when you go? No, the other way, no. Huh. Well, I've seen clients, and sometimes I've been accused of having eye patterns so much they whip my head around, but this is the first example of someone we've really seen. So that's good.

People are going to have idiosyncratic behavior, or they're going to behave the way they do, and it's probably based on your history. Sometimes I make representations that move my head. Don't you guys? Yeah. Not unusual.

Trying to get there faster. Any other questions about this process? So you all understand what to do with your clients. It's going to give you a quick indication of if there's something to work on. And it's also useful if you're ever teaching an NLP training.

I'm not suggesting you would be, but you might be in the future sometime. And someone says to you, this person's not normally organized, you'd go, eye tracking, okay. And then you can test the eye tracking. What you'll find is the people that are probably not either the way it is on slide 94, normally organized or reverse organized, probably have some sort of glitch or some sort of trauma or some sort of non-smoothness in the tracking, and that's why the eye patterns would show up that way. Okay, other questions?

Great. We're going to move on to strategies next. This is the end of Tape 11, Side B.