# Strategy Elicitation

Okay, strategies are next. And in terms of how do you elicit a strategy, it's pretty simple. You just kind of ask. And personally, I prefer a number of different ways to ask the questions. I think if I were, like, for example, if I were selling real estate, I think one of the first things I'd ask my clients is, I'd say to my clients, you know, one of the things I like to do is ask my clients some questions, which may sound really strange when you first ask them, but what it will do is it will allow me to discover how you would decide to buy a house and how you'd be motivated to buy a house and then how you'd be reassured that the house was a good purchase for you.

So I hope you don't mind if I ask, and then just go ahead and ask your questions. I think I really would do that if I were, if I were selling real estate or insurance or cars. And what I would do is I'd couch, and when, when we did this consulting, we used to ask our clients right up front, you know? Well, I, we're gonna ask you couple of questions that will allow us to discover your decision making, how you decide inside yourself. And what this will help you do is it will help you make decisions a lot more easily.

And we just elicit the strategy. I mean, just straight out, we'd go for the strategy. So I think if you tell the people what you're doing, you don't have to be really covert about it. You just tell them, hey, I'd like to know how you make decisions better so I can serve you. So that's one of the ways that we did it.

And I think in a therapeutic setting, of course, you can always say to the client, I'd like to elicit your strategies. Obviously, that's pretty easy. In an educational setting, reasonably easy. The only place where you'd have to be, sort of explain what you're doing beforehand, I think, is from a business point of view. And my preference is to be kind of sort of nonchalant about it.

And what I'd like to do is, is to demonstrate the process of strategy elicitation with some people. So what I'd like to do is I'd like to demonstrate, I'd also like to demonstrate the process of, of discovering how you'd know that somebody's normally organized or reverse organized, because I think that's also really important to do in the process of beginning to do a strategy elicitation. So the questions for eliciting whether or not a person is normally organized or reversed organized are in your practitioner manual, assuming you've taken a practitioner training, and that's going to be very easy to find. Or you can look at the slides, and you can look at slide number 95 for those questions. First of all, we need a volunteer.

Yeah, come on up. Give him a hand. Are you normally... Oh, I don't have to ask you that. Come on up.

Yeah. Thank you. Give him a hand. Good. Okay, Jean.

Well, let me just ask you a couple of questions. Do you remember the house you grew up in? Yes, I do. What color was it? Outside?

Gray. What color was it? Gray. John has a look-to-talk rule, doesn't he? He's looking at me, not moving his eyes.

And what I'm going to do is I'm going to look away from him to give him the hint that he can actually have his eyes move in any direction. He's going to then change his gaze to somewhere else, probably. Oh, there we go. Yes, thank you. Now, the first car you ever owned, what color was that, I wonder?

Green. Green. And what would happen if you painted it one of those hot pink, you know, striped, with an orange stripe in the middle? What would that look like? Now, what happened was, in the first case, Sean moved his eyes upward and to the right as we look at him, and then he said green.

What just happened was that he moved his eyes upward into the right for visual recall, essentially. And my sense is what he was doing, and we'll ask him in just a moment, was he was recalling his car. Then, when he got his car recalled, he went over to Visual Construct to create what it would look like if we did all that weird stuff to it. Is that right? 100% accurate. Okay.

We're going to postulate based on that that Jean is normally organized. Are we not? Yeah. Okay. Well, let's just see.

So, Jean, remember, did you have a pet when you were growing up? Yes. What was the sound of your pet's voice, I wonder? Do you know? The sound.

It's over there. There you go. Okay. Now, the reason I said it was over there, because he went to Auditory Construct, and he's going, the sound, the sound, the sound. I said, it's over there.

He goes, over there. He goes, yeah, yeah. So you got it now, right? Yeah. Okay, good.

So I think we can pretty well postulate he's normally organized, but let's just do one more. John, do you have a favorite beach or a favorite place where you go? Favorite wooded place maybe where you go? What would it feel like to walk on the cool, wet sand? What would it feel like?

Yeah, yeah, you're almost there. You're not quite there yet. On the cool, wet sand, what would it feel like? That's it. Mmm.

Okay. He actually went down, if you're watching, he went down to Auditory Digital first, didn't he? Thought about it. What would it feel like? Okay.

And then he went over to, the minute he got his eyes over into kinesthetic, he said, mmm. Which is actually auditory, but it sounds right to me, doesn't it? To me, too. Okay, Jean, I like your watch. It's a great watch.

Where did you get that watch? Do you remember when you bought it? Yes, it was 76. 76? Yeah. Do you remember when you bought it?

Do you actually remember the time when you bought it? Yes. You do? Okay, so what happened? You walked in the store and it jumped on your wrist or what?

You know, it was right after the Olympics. Right after the Olympics, yeah. And those watches were around the five or six that was used at the pool as a double check for the cycle time, official time. Yeah. And that was one of those.

And they make it free, not free, but up for sale, and it just happened that it was one of the five lucky clients. Really? Wow. Did you get the strategy? He moved his eyes in several different directions as he was describing the purchase.

Now, I'm not going to actually say what I observed to the room, but if you want to, I will in just a moment. So let's go on and continue. This is actually, this may be a unique purchase for him, but I think we do have a strategy. What I'd like to do is continue the elicitation. This is kind of unique because there's only a certain number, and of course, he had it and he's had it for such a long time.

So this may be a unique purchase for him. We don't know that yet. But let's find out. So, Jean, can you help me out with this because I'm a little slow. This is the Colombo approach again.

I'm a little slow. How did you know that was the watch for you? I mean, what happened to cause you to decide? Remember when you were deciding? Yes.

Can you go right back to that decision? Tell me, how did you know that was the watch for you? He just ran the strategy for us again. Now, what did he, let's see if we can get some postulations as to what he did. Once is a, perhaps an anomaly, twice is a pattern.

Who wants to take a guess at what the pattern is? Well, the first thing is he saw it. And then his eyes moved real fast. I didn't see the rest. He saw it.

Where did his eyes go to? Where did his eyes go to? VR, AD, VR is what I saw. Okay. Is that what everybody else saw?

What else did you see? Kinesthetic, yeah. How many people saw kinesthetic? Okay, okay. So here's what we're seeing.

We are seeing those three, in my opinion, and a lot of times what we may be seeing is loopbacks, so we've got to pay attention to the looping going on. So let's start again. I'm a little slow. Can you help me with this? What happened?

Can you remember when you were deciding that that was the watch for you? How did you make that decision? So I saw an advertising and I moved. I knew that I need that because it was very exclusive. So I come back and I go down to the store and get it.

Did you see it? What was it? What was it? VRK. And it looked like he went back up to...

No. I think he went to AD and told himself something like that. Yeah. What was the criteria? Did you pick up the criteria?

Did you hear what he said when his eyes moved? Exclusive. It was exclusive and he needed it. Right. It was exclusive and he needed it.

Did you all pick that up so far? Yeah? Not yet? Let's look at it again. John, can you help me with this?

I'm a little slow. You guys better get it soon or I'll... Okay, so, John, what happened? How did you know that was the watch for you? Talk to me.

Okay. What happened? What happened when you decided that that was the watch for you? What did you do? You know, the first trigger was I saw a newspaper advertising, and then I knew where the store was, and I decided to go and get it.

Did you see the eye banners? And he did a little sweep across the bottom just then. So he moved his eyes, first of all, to visual, and you can hear it on the predicates. Those of you listening on the tapes, you can hear the predicates. Right?

He said, I saw in the newspaper, and it was exclusive, and I went to get it. Get it. Okay, so let's, and that absolutely matches his eye patterns, the words. So let's postulate at the moment. Visual recall under a digital kinesthetic.

Postulate that. Let's ask him another example just to see. I hope you bought those shoes more recently, John. I love your shoes. Where did you get those shoes?

Did you buy those yourself? Yes, I did. Are you happy with the purchase? By the way, that's something you should always ask. Some clients use a different strategy when they're not happy with the purchase.

Are you happy with the purchase? Yes, they are rubber made. Rubber made. I'm with you. Totally with you.

It would be a little cold for Montreal, but what the heck. I bought them in the States. Yeah. Okay, so great shoes. Do you remember when you bought them?

Yes, I do. What happened? How did you decide those were the shoes for you? What happened when you... Well, I had the cover shoes, and it was very warm.

It was in the Boston area, and I had to walk, so I decided that I need something that I would be comfortable with. You keep going you keep going you just you don't have to look at me just okay sort of around yeah okay and then i walk in the store and i look something that i will feel that i can walk in the heat with and i look at the model and it seemed to be comfortable and i i tried it and i did it that's great's great. That's great. Did you see the eye patterns? He finally ran it.

See the eye patterns? He said it looked, it seemed to be comfortable. That's dissociated, isn't it? It's got to be a criteria. Seemed to be comfortable.

And then he said what? Tried it on. So his predicates absolutely match his eye patterns. We're seeing the same eye patterns. Are you all seeing the eye patterns?

I did. Yeah, yeah. It was actually sort of, what he does is he sort of, when he does his AD, he drops down and then goes to kinesthetic. So watch it. We'll do it again here.

Help me out with this, will you? Help me out with this. I love those shoes. Can you remember when you bought those shoes? Like, those are great.

What happened when you decided? How did you know those were the shoes for you? What happened when you were deciding? Can you remember your decision? I went in the store, and I look at...

Don't look at me. Just let your eyes wander. Okay, I went in the store. I look at different model, and I said that this model, and it look like comfortable, so I try it, and I felt good in, too, and I bought that. Okay, so I think we can postulate a decision-making strategy of V-R-A-D-K.

Now, let's test it. Let's test it. And the way we test it is we make a proposal to Jean, the first one, which will be absolutely ridiculous and outside of his strategy, and then we'll make a proposal that will be inside of his strategy, one that will be something that we'll see how it works. Okay, so the first proposal, Jean, I'd like to, if we could, I'd like to make a proposal to you to where, let's see, I think what we'd like to do is I'll give it to you, you can feel it. And then really get a sense of it, so we'll talk for quite a while about it.

And I wonder if once we talk about it, even if we talk for a couple hours, if that might be something you'd like to do. Not really. And you notice he's being polite, though, isn't he? He's being very polite. But he's being honest at the end.

He's going, I don't think so. I don't think so. Okay, John, so I'd like to show you a proposal, which, as you look at it, by the way, you'll see that it's very exclusive. It makes a lot of sense to do, and you can really feel good about doing it. I want to buy.

Notice, by the way, that as we were doing this, we had his head nodding up and down. His head was nodding yes as soon as we got inside the strategy. We also used one of his buzzwords exclusive and feeling really good about it and nice color shifts. So you notice a real difference when you have the strategy versus when you don't. And so that's the process.

So thanks, Sean. Give him a hand. Thank you. Okay. So what we're about to do is I'd like to actually ask you guys to go and elicit some strategies.

And I want to talk about, for just a second, let's look at page 813 and look at the different kinds of strategies that there are and what we might decide to elicit. What I'd like to do, generally when I'm eliciting a strategy, the first thing I'm doing is I'm going to elicit the decision strategy. I'm going to elicit the decision making strategy because that falls right in the middle. So let me use the prime example of buying a car. Typically, and this is how someone would buy a car.

Typically, you're going along, you're going along, and you're not motivated to buy a car, and at some point, something happens, and you get motivated. What happened from the beginning of the trigger for motivation and the time you were motivated to buy that car, you ran your motivation strategy. But to be honest with you, you're not in the middle of the decision-making strategy at all. You're nowhere near the decision-making strategy. If you're a car dealer or if you've ever worked with or for car dealers, you'll know that most people who buy cars will decide, will be motivated to buy a car up to six months before they actually hit the showroom floor.

After about six months, they may go, and usually then they buy and they decide in one day. So just because a client is running a motivation strategy doesn't mean they're going to be in the decision-making strategy. So I usually look at the decision-making strategy first just to separate that out. So I'll start with the decision-making strategy, and the decision-making strategy occurs when the client is in the store making the decision. So for Jean, it was, how did you know that?

Remember the words I used, remember when you were deciding, or can you remember when you decided, how did you know that that was the watch for you, or how did you know that those were the shoes for you? How did you decide those were the shoes for you? How did you make that decision? Okay, we've got the client right back into it. We get the decision-making strategy.

The decision-making strategy occurs when the client is in the store deciding among a number of different options. The convincer is the number of times that the person has to run through the loop in order to be able to make this decision. We didn't actually formally elicit John's, uh, convincer, but my guess is that we picked it up. And how many, what would you say John's convincer is? Just from, it's either one time or automatic, isn't it?

Because each of the times he didn't have to do a lot of searching for it. So let's ask Jean a question which comes from the metaprograms section. And if you'd like to, while you're reviewing strategies, you could read the metaprograms section of the Timeline Therapy book, the section on the convincer. So let's ask Jean what his convincer is and see if we adequately pick it up. So would you guys say it was either one or automatic?

Wouldn't you? Yeah. Okay, let's find Jean. So Jean, can you remember a time when you noticed that someone else was good at what they did? And how did you know that they were good at it?

How do you know someone else is good at what they do? I just know. You just know. And how often do you have to be convinced of their competence before you're convinced? No more than one time.

Okay. So, well, okay, that's pretty accurate. Jean is either, from that answer, for metaprograms, and we're going to get to metaprograms in just a bit, but from that answer, he's either automatic or one. Right? I mean, that is an answer that would, no more than one time, or it may be automatic.

Yeah. So Jean is either convinced either automatically or one time, and I think that's pretty much what he showed us with his two occurrences of the strategy. So the convincer is how many times do you have to loop through the strategy? It can be picked up with that question I just asked, which is how do you know someone else is good at what they do? And the second part of the question is how often do you have to be convinced of their competency?

How often do they have to prove competency to you, sorry, before they're convinced? That's in the metaprogram notes, which you have in your manual, which we'll get to. It's also in the timeline therapy book in the section on metaprograms. So that's the convincer. So we've got the decision-making strategy and the convincer.

Then I go back and I get the motivation. And the question for motivation is, can you remember a time when you were totally motivated? I don't think we have to elicit it necessarily with regard to buying. But if I were selling real estate, I'd say, can you remember a time when you were totally motivated to buy a house? And if the client had never bought a house before, I'd go for a major purchase.

Like, can you remember a time when you bought a car? Can you remember a time when you bought a new car or something, if they're buying a new house or whatever? So I think I'd go for a motivation of a major purchase if I were selling major real estate or insurance. But I think, for example, you can simply ask the client, can you remember a time when you were totally motivated? Probably you'd want to get the motivation in the context you were working on.

So if you're working with a client in business, you'd probably want to elicit it in the business context. So you can remember a time in business you were totally motivated. Okay, so we've got the motivation strategy, and we've got the decision strategy, and we've got the convincer. Then the final piece is the reassurance. And again, of course, the script is down here at the bottom, but you would say for the reassurance, can you remember a time you were totally reassured that a purchase you made was a good purchase?

Remember a time you were totally reassured that a purchase you made was a good purchase. So you can use the script that's here. And my preference is also to use the eye patterns. My preference is also to use the eye patterns. So what I'd like you to do in this next exercise is I'd like you to get together with two other people, groups of three, one group of four, if necessary.

And I'd like you to get together and elicit the client's eye patterns. And I'd like you to go around, each person elicit the decision first with the convincer, then the motivation, then the reassurance. And if you get to deep love strategies, that would be great, especially for those of you who are going to be doing couple counseling. It's very important to get the love strategies for couple counseling, which includes the attraction strategy, recognizing attraction, and the deep love strategy. The only exception to all of the different strategies that we elicit, the only exception to this, is the deep love strategy, which is on page 814. 814 is the deep love strategy, which is a separate case for elicitation.

Now, why do I suggest that we only elicit these strategies during the master practitioner training? Actually, the format that we use is going to be probably applicable across a number of different contexts or a number of different places or a number of different ways. So let's see. Typically, aside from the buying strategy, people are motivated to do things at certain times. People make decisions, and they're reassured that those decisions are good.

And somewhere in the process of deciding to buy, they become convinced that those decisions are possible to make. So eliciting the buying strategies for many clients will work cross-contextually. And at least it gives you the experience of how to elicit strategies. And quite frankly, most strategies are made up of a motivation, a decision, and a reassurance strategy with some sort of a convincer operating along the decision. For example, aren't the love strategies, isn't the attraction the same as motivation in terms of being a similar kind of strategy?

And isn't the decision, isn't that recognizing attraction, pretty much? And isn't the deep love strategy, isn't that the reassurance strategy? So what I'm suggesting is that most strategies will run through motivation, decision with convincer, and reassurance, and that simply by eliciting these and becoming proficient at it, you'll be able to elicit just any kind of strategy that you need to. So what I'd like to do is I'd like to spend the next hour, and what did this take? Like five, six minutes, right?

Ten minutes. So I'd like to spend the next hour and go around and have you at least elicit from your client. So go around the group of three. All right, welcome back. How did that last exercise go?

Yeah? Are you guys good at eliciting strategies? Are there any questions about strategy elicitation and utilization? I have a question. Yeah.

Is it possible for your eye patterns to change, like to be reverse organized and then become normally organized or the other way around? Since when? Since a year and a half ago. Talking about yourself? Yeah.

Very, very unlikely. I've never seen it since 1984. I'm not suggesting it couldn't happen, but very unlikely. In the absence of some trauma or maybe a blow to the head or something like that, I think in the absence of that, it would be very unlikely that that would happen. A year and a half ago when I took the practitioner training, I was told that I was normally organized.

We did all the exercises. Last night, they determined that I was reverse organized. How did they determine that? And it was completely obvious they were right. How did they determine that?

Well, by doing the test. They asked me to remember stuff when I was a kid, and they asked me. How did they ask you? How? Yeah, did they ask you with...

Why don't you come on up? Let's see whether you're normally organized or reverse organized. This is a question that comes up all the time. So, Paula, what was the color of the room where you grew up? Do you remember that?

As a kid? Yeah, pink. And what would happen if we painted it bright green? It would be different. It would be different.

Did you have a pet when you were growing up? Yeah. And what was the sound of your pet's voice? She hardly ever barked. She hardly ever barked.

What would her bark have sounded like, since you didn't hear it very much, with an elephant's trunk on her nose? Very much deeper, I guess. Do you have a favorite place where you go, like, to walk along the beach? Have you ever walked along the beach? What does it feel like to walk along the beach with the cold, wet sand?

Wonderful. Okay. So what would you say? Reverse organize. Reverse organize, yeah.

I would say reverse organize just based on those questions. Thanks. Give Paul a hand. Thank you. Thank you.

So it's possible that the elicitation that was done previously was insufficient. I don't think that, I don't think, I don't think I've ever seen eye patterns change. Although I, I, I, that doesn't mean that it isn't possible. But it's unlikely. In the absence of some neurological something that happened, you didn't have any like big thing happen to you neurologically, did you?

No. So I would say it would be very unusual. To me, it would be very unusual that it would change. Yeah. So I think you can say you're reverse.

Are you left-handed? You're not left-handed, are you? Were you made to write right-handed when you were a kid? So you're ambidextrous. Okay, well, that would be a tip-off then.

See, and that's one thing you can do. If you get reversed eye patterns and the client's right-handed, ask them, were you ambidextrous or did you have trouble choosing? Maybe you didn't choose a hemisphere until later on after you were already writing. Maybe you didn't choose a dominant hemisphere. Sometimes kids do not choose dominant hemispheres until later on in life or until they get older.

And sometimes after they actually start writing, so it's possible that, I mean, it's possible you did it that way. But since you're ambidextrous, you probably have a great deal of flexibility in either direction, too. Probably. Yeah? One of the things about kids who have not chosen a dominant hemisphere with regards to spelling strategies or getting them to read and so forth, to improve their ability in school is to assist them in choosing some place to put their eyes for recall of spelling information.

So someone who is... So educational kinesiology is useful for balancing both hemispheres. If you've seen any of the educational kinesiology like cross-calling or having them do things that are bilateral, that go back and forth across the midline. All of those are possible to do. Okay, other questions about eliciting strategy?

Good. Okay, so you guys are now masters of strategy detection and utilization. And what I want to do next is to move on and look at the process of strategy installation. If we go back and review slide number 91, a couple things are possible. We may want to change a strategy that we have to make changes in the strategy itself so that it produces the desired outcome.

Or we may want to install a brand new strategy if needed. So what I'd like to do is I'd like to go back and review chaining anchors. I'd like to go back and review chaining anchors because I think that the thinking process that we go through when we design a chain of anchors is perhaps one of the most important thinking processes leading to both chain design and strategies that we have. So let's go back and talk a little bit about how to do chaining anchors, and we're going to be looking at page 424. We actually have two different sets of handouts on page 424 and 425 of two different ways to install a chain of anchors.

Chaining anchors, number one, is the design of the chain that was used in the accelerated practitioner tape set, the basic training collection. And the way to put that chain together is simply to fire the first anchor. And when the first anchor comes to its peak, then you add the second one. And then to add subsequent anchors, you fire the first anchor, watch the first state come to its peak, watch the second state come to its peak, and then add the third anchor. Then you fire the first anchor, watch the second state come to its peak, watch the third state come to its peak, and add the fourth anchor.

That particular chaining anchors number one is completely outlined in the basic training collection tape set, so we're not going to cover it again here. If you want to learn how to do that particular style of chaining anchors, then you should go back and look at that. What we'll use for this exercise now, and you can go ahead and turn to page 425, is chaining anchors number two. And the way we do that is simply fire number one, and at its peak, add number two, wait until number two peaks, add number three, wait until number three peaks, and then add number four, assuming we have four steps. Okay, so let's talk a little bit about chain design, and we'll be using chaining anchors number two, and then I want to add on a really powerful addition that makes a real big difference in your ability to do or end up with a client in a really nice end state when you've done a set of chaining anchors.

We reviewed anchoring this morning. Some of you attended that class. And you'll remember that in collapsing anchors, we actually have our finger on the anchor simultaneously, whereas chaining anchors is going to be a sequential set of states. So when we do a chain of anchors, we'll do a sequential set of states from one state to the next state to the next state to the next state. So whereas collapse anchors is simultaneous, chaining anchors is going to be sequential.

And usually chaining anchors is used when the desired state or the resource state is significantly different from the present state. Typically, chaining anchors is used when the present state is a stuck state. So what kind of stuck states could there be? There could be a state like procrastination. Procrastination is a stuck state.

Or how about stuck no options? There could be a state of stuck no options. Or there could be a state of hesitation, or the person not moving. Those are all examples of states which don't have movement to them. So typically, chaining anchors is useful for a state in and of itself which does not have movement in the state.

That is to say, the state itself would not cause anyone to move. Okay, so the first thing we want to look at when we design a chain of anchors is what's the presenting problem. And I'm going to, just for this example, we'll use an example of procrastination to motivation. Most of you have done that. There could be a number of other states we'd use, and when I do the demonstration, maybe we'll look at some other types of processes.

Okay, so in the process of chain design, the first thing you have to do is you have to decide the first state and the last state. You have to decide the first state and the last state. Actually, if you look on page 425, this is outlined. First thing you want to do is get in report. Second thing is to set the frame.

And third thing is to identify the undesirable present state, whatever that is. Then we're going to actually decide on the positive resource state or the end state, and then we're going to decide on what intermediate state lead to that end state, and then we're going to design the chain. So let's see. The question is, if I'm moving from procrastination to motivation, the question is, what's going to be a state that's sufficient enough to get me off of the previous state? The question is, so there's some issues about that.

And one of the first issues is, is the second state going to be toward or away from? So assuming, and we'll look at wall chart number 12, assuming that we're starting with procrastination at the top and ending up with motivation at the bottom, then in terms of intermediate states, there could be some other states that we want to add that would be good. The first thing we need to ask ourselves when we're talking to the client is, does the second state need to be toward or away from? That's an important issue. My favorite sales contest for the away from sales department is make a sale and you get to keep your job.

I don't know if you've ever met a salesperson who was motivated by away froms, but if you go and say we're going to have a sales contest and everyone who makes a sale gets a $100 bill, the away from salesperson is likely not motivated by that. On the other hand, if you were to say to a towards salesperson, hey, make a sale and you get to keep your job, you'll definitely make them angry. So the question of whether the second state needs to be a toward or away from depends on who the person is and how they react and what's definitely what's definitely gonna get them off of the previous state and onto the next state. The next, the next issue is that this, the next state from whatever, wherever state you're at, whether you're at one, two, three, four, whatever state, or actually four could be the last one. Whatever state you're at, the next state has gotta have some movement to it.

So one, one of the issues with regards to movement is there's a lot of states that are pretty good, decent, intense states that one could use for a specific chain, but they don't have movement. So a state like satisfaction, I don't know about you, but when I hit satisfaction, I don't have any motivation to go anywhere. I don't have any motivation to do anything. It's kind of like an even intense satisfaction is actually less moving than regular old satisfaction. So you've got to look and see the next state needs to have some movement to it.

And you can intuitively tell this. What I do personally is I try on the state. So I'll try on the state, and I'll notice if that state is going to have movement to it, whether it's toward or away from, and whether it's actually the next issue, which is, will it be a sufficient state to move the chain on to the next state? So sometimes if you put a state into the middle of a chain, which is kind of a sort of a dissociated or a low-level state, then you may also have the chain not pull through. And then finally, the second-to-last state should be a toward state.

So it should be toward what the person wants. This is the end of Tape 12, Side A.