# Metamodeliii, Not Knowing, De-Identification, Changing Reality Strategy

Okay, how did that, metamodel three, how did that go? Good. Any questions about that? Yes. When you're finished any of these exercises, the client, when you ask them where the problem is, they have forgotten.

The problem's gone, but they can remember what the problem, what the issue was. Did your clients remember what the issue was? Some did, some didn't. Right. So that's normal.

Typically, that's the way it will be. Thank you. Thanks for asking. In fact, for some clients, these will be a complete intervention in and of themselves. For some clients, they will not be.

For some clients, you'll have to take a detailed personal history. For some clients, you won't have to. It depends on the depth of the problem. It depends on everything considered about the client. Well, the next question was, we were wondering if the person that could remember the issue, if it was actually cleared, like if that was...

Right, so you have to ask the client. So then you can repeat the issue back to the client. Well, so how do you, so how are you feeling about this? Or something like that. Okay, one more exercise, as if we're not torching around backwards.

Let me ask you a question. Gregory Bateson once asked the founders of NLP the following question. What do you think the biggest nominalization you have in your life is? I. This next pattern works on who you think you are.

First of all, let me just point out a couple of things before we get to that. Stay right here. Stay right here with me. Stay right on the page you're on. Slide number 44.

When you consider something with regards to the boundaries of that thing, when you consider something, the question is, so we're considering, what are we considering right now? We're considering the I, right? When you think of considering I, doesn't that, when you say I, which is a nominalization, whoa, what if you turned I back into a process? That's a great meditation, by the way. If you've never done it, it's kind of, the first like 17 minutes are kind of scary, but after that it's downhill.

So when you consider the boundary, so when you say I, don't you set up boundary conditions? Just like chair, not chair. I, not I. So when you think of considering something, anything that you're considering, these are some questions that you consider boundary conditions. Like what is it and what is it not?

That definitely gives you boundary conditions. Now, the next question you have to ask yourself is, how do you know? And then, one of my most favorite questions is, what is it that you need not to know to know this? So, take this thought for a problem. What is the problem?

What is it not? How do you know? And what is it that you need not to know to know this is a problem? Or another way to ask that question is what are you pretending not to know in order to have this be a problem? What are you pretending not to know?

Or what is it that you need not to know to know this? So again, that asks for everything else. This is clearly a set of questions that torque our boundary conditions somewhat. So we're looking at boundary conditions, and we're about to step into some boundary-ness, I think. So before we actually talk about who we are, just for a moment, slide number 44.

This is not a full intervention in and of itself. This is just an example of how to think. On slide number 44. Okay, you guys ready? So let's just do a little review.

I like to talk theory as we do this, right? So no matter what you think you are, you're always more than that. Slide number 45. Reality is a construction. And reality and meaning are created through relationships.

Living is about learning, isn't it? And our perceptions are learned, aren't they? How did you learn how to, did you ever, they have some stories of people when they put a, from Africa, when they put a television set in front of them and they can't see the pictures, right? Because they don't have their created reality around them. Actually looking at a TV and, well, it's probably freeing, isn't it?

You wouldn't have to watch CNN every day. Okay, so now we're ready. Now we're ready to go look at page 46. This is a de-identification pattern. It's usually useful with complex equivalents, which is the construct of identification.

So this particular pattern, and I'm indebted to John Overdurf and Julie Silverthorne for this pattern, this particular pattern will allow you to de-identify or de-identify the self with something. Now, interestingly enough, Alfred Korzybski, Science Insanity, 1933, Korzybski said the world would be a better place if we did away with the verb to be. He just wanted to do away with it totally. And in fact, one of the training things he used to do with people is he used to say, you don't ever get to say I am anything. Just think what would happen if you dropped out your whole, just think what would happen if you stopped saying I am this or I am that.

Yeah? Russian doesn't have a verb to be. Is that what happens? Cool. Wow, Russian does not have a verb to be.

So when you think in Russian, that's exactly what happens. So you don't get to identify with something that you're not. And remember what we just said? Slide 45. No matter what you think you are, you're always more than that.

Okay, so let's look at this particular pattern then. So the complex equivalence is going to have the verb to be commonly in the form of I am. What you want to do is pace and feedback the complex equivalence of the client. And then the third question is where we begin to do the work. So again, we're associating the client.

Remember? If you look, let's just go back and look at slide 38. We've associated the client. Then step number three is going to dissociate, is that all you think that you are? Next step, aren't you more than that?

So that's going to associate to resources. What are you that's not whatever the previous identification is? In this case, you want an answer, so the client can consider everything else so far. But in step number five, you want an answer. You want actually a word to stabilize the shift.

So you're actually asking them to give you a word for boundaries. And then, of course, you're going to go, and step number six, you're going to say, and beyond whatever word you got, is that all you are? How much more are you than that? And if you need extra leverage, you do know you are much more than that, don't you? And then step number seven, how do you know?

Now that's going to, how do you know, is actually going to, is the future pays resources part. It's going to anchor the change into the client's reality strategy. So is there anyone in the room that thinks there's something that you'd rather, that you didn't think you are? Is there someone in class here that would like to play? Who, when you think you are something that you would rather you didn't think that you are?

Okay, Sun, what is it? I think I'm a bad decision maker. You think you're a bad decision maker? Okay. So you think you are a bad decision maker, right?

So is that all you think you are? No. Aren't you more than that? Yeah. So what are you that's not a bad decision maker?

If you're watching or notice, there we go. Nice shift there, son. Nice shift. Nice shift to shoot over the boundaries of that one. Can you give me a word?

I know you're still in the void there. Yeah. Out there. Out there. You're out there.

More. More. More. I don't know what that means. You're more out there.

And beyond that, is that all that you are? How much more are you than that? Excellent. She's at nonverbal. So let me ask you just one final question.

How do you know? Oh, nice! I don't know if you watched her, but she went through several times with some really nice blankness there. Okay, son. Welcome back.

Welcome back. moment for that to continue to integrate. By the way, is this also, are we also doing chunking in this process? Right? Because when you say, aren't you more than that, aren't you more than that, or what are you that's not, you're actually chunking the client up. So we're actually, we're actually moving now into, and we're going to consider chunking in just a minute, but I want to point out that we're actually chunking the client to larger and larger concepts at the same time as we're going over the boundaries of identification.

So, Sun, that sort of seems like it's a little more integrated. Tell me, what was the problem? It had to do with decisions. It did? Yeah.

And can you tell me what the problem was? Yeah, I didn't used to be able to make decisions very well. Okay, so tell me about right now. I'm a really good decision maker. I can make decisions easily.

You can? Yeah. Okay. You seem to have decided that very quickly. I'm baffled.

Aren't you more than that? I'm much more than that. Oh, sorry, sorry. Oh, I'm being bad. So, what's the deal on decision making?

Are you good? I'm really good. Okay. Excellent. Good, give her a hand.

That's good. Good job. Okay. This is five minutes apiece, this exercise. Get a client.

By the way, I hope you guys know this is the toasted day. Get a client who has an identification using the verb to be or have them at least state it to you in the form of I am. Pace it and then go through the steps on page 246. Groups of three, different people, one group of four. If you're doing it on tape, please stop the tapes and do the exercise now.

All right, so how did that last exercise go? Are you guys toasted yet? Good. Are there some questions? I had a couple of things.

First, our best calibration was when our client fell out of his chair. Good job. Well, that's knowing you're not you. That was a big one, wasn't it? Oh, we forgot to say that.

Very good. And I had two questions. Yeah, oh really? One was people feeling sleepy after they've gone through any of the processes. Is that kind of a desire to integrate?

Certain. Well, there's a couple possibilities. Sometimes feeling sleepy is a sign that not all of it's been let go of. Sometimes feeling sleepy is if you have a neurological something which had inside it a lot of energy, so that that neurological something, whatever the boundaries were, provided a stimulant for the person, then they will feel sleepy when it goes. For example, anger and fear as emotions are stimulants.

When a lot of trapped anger and fear in the client's body disappears, the client could feel more sleepy afterward. On the other hand, when you get rid of sadness and guilt for a client, those are depressants, and so the client could feel more energized after the therapy. So if a client says to you, I feel sleepy, or if the client says to you, I feel energized, you say, that's perfect. And that's totally normal. And the other one is, I've noticed in a couple of clients, they'd go to a certain point in whatever we were questioning, and they'd fold their arms across their chest.

And I didn't say anything in any case, but I was observing that's usually a very resistant posture. And did that also indicate that was as far as they were willing to go with this? You're talking about clients here or clients at home? Clients here. Well, I think, first of all, you're actually taking the physiology that you're observing and you're mind-reading what that means.

Right. And for you to observe that as being resistant is, first of all, not sensory-based. From an NLP point of view, what we would say is the client crossed their arms. Oftentimes people cross their arms because they're tired of their arms hanging down off the chair. And so I think you'd have to calibrate whether when the client crossed their arms, if they indeed at that moment became more resistant.

If they did, then I would cross my arms, too, and I'd match and mirror what they were giving me. In other words, I'd give them back the same sort of analog that they were giving me so that we would maintain more rapport. All of this, all of these techniques require rapport at the unconscious level. And I would encourage you to maintain, and I think you all have. I mean, you guys are great.

Really, we were just talking about it during the exercise. You guys are a wonderful group. We're having a ton of fun. A lot of rapport here. So that's good.

So if you see a client, like, for example, fold their arms or whatever, I would prefer that you don't read into that that they're resistant. Although, I think if we were following body language a la Julius Faust and other people who've written books on the subject, we would say, oh yeah, that means a resistant client. But my point of view is it doesn't mean that. It just means if a client crosses their legs away from you, it doesn't mean that they're resistant. It simply means that maybe one of their feet would feel better off the floor.

My point of view. My feelings exactly. That's nice to hear. So that I don't read into that. I don't read that into that.

I just simply, from an NLP point of view, what we would say is we would describe that as the client crossed their arms and perhaps put one of their legs over the other. And then we would look to see if in their behavior at the same time, if we noticed some language that said they were more resistant or if we noticed that they were not actually doing the processes that we suggested. So I would tie the two of them together so that whatever I noticed from that, then if I noticed it again, they crossed their arms and got more resistant, then they crossed their arms and crossed their arms and got more resistant, and I said, aha, there's a pattern there. Then I could begin to look at it that way. But the first time they crossed their arms, to me, doesn't mean resistance.

It simply means maybe their arms feel better like this, or maybe they're starting to lean back. I don't like to lean back and have my arms hanging off the chair. It's kind of weird. So when you're sitting on a chair with no arms, to me, that's the way it goes. All right, thanks.

Oh, so that's exactly what you were doing. Okay, so you were the client. Great, okay. Okay, so you're doing it for comfort. Great.

So client crosses their arms does not mean they're resistant. It simply means they need to get more comfortable. It should mean that there was plenty of rapport there or could mean there was plenty of rapport there. And I think for us, a lot of times, you know, we look at people and then we mind read into the situation and what they're doing, and a lot of times that gets us into trouble. If we just did a sensory-based description of that, then probably we'd be a lot better off.

A couple things about all these patterns we're learning. Did you all notice that the patterns are pretty much the same, right? You go down the list, calibrate the client to being at each level, and keep doing it that way. So pretty much a lot of the stuff in quantum linguistics is sort of laid out for you in terms of patterns that we've noticed that work in a certain way. Oftentimes, a couple things.

Oftentimes quantum linguistics are not the total shift. It's not going to get the total shift, but it certainly will loosen up the client's model of the world, won't it? And a lot of times it will get a total shift. Let's see. This particular pattern we just did can be used even for states, for example, of depression.

So a client says, I am X. I am depressed. I am certain. Again, it may not get the entire thing, but it will certainly loosen up the model of the world. It will certainly loosen up the reality strategy with regards to the boundaries that the person has, which is what we've been working on.

Another point, which is if you want to really cement the change home or want to have some leverage, then go at least two levels beyond the shift. So, aren't you more than that? Aren't you more than that? For first level, aren't you more than that? That's a shift.

Aren't you more than that? Aren't you more than that? So at least go a couple levels beyond the shift. One more thing. How many people noticed a moment of blankness?

Anyone? Yeah, most everyone. A moment of blankness or a moment of no thoughts or a moment of suspension. The other thing is that this particular pattern or technique is also useful for de-identifying yourself from whatever it is, anything. And how far would you like to take it?

What if you took it, what if you, from the point of view of chunking up, which this pattern actually does quite well, what if you took it all the way to what? Existence, yeah. So that might be fun. I would not recommend you do that with a client without telling them first what you're doing because I personally think that might be inappropriate. But it's certainly, if you wanted to do it yourself, certainly would be, certainly would be possible.

I think it might be inappropriate for you to take the client all the way to existence with this process. Aren't you more than that? Aren't you more than that? Aren't you more than that? Aren't you more than that?

Okay, I'm the entire universe. It's a nice pattern to do yourself. If you want to do that, it's kind of fun. And the next pattern we're about to do is kind of fun to do that with. But I personally think it might be inappropriate to take a client all the way to universal consciousness without talking to them about it first.

You may blow out some boundaries beyond the context of which they came in for the therapy. Let me put it to you another way. I know someone, and I didn't train this person, who consistently takes people beyond the boundaries that they came in for into to universal boundaries, which is okay, except that the person would probably get a massive life change, and unless that was what they asked for, it might not be appropriate to do. So ecologically, I think that would be something that I would work with the ecology of the client before I actually did something like that. Okay, let's look at page 243.

Chapter 2, page 43. Linguistic resourcing. Re-source-ing. This has one of my favorite questions of all time. If you don't know what that question is, it's how do you know it's a problem?

Or how is that a problem now? Another favorite question. This particular process, whereas before we were working with boundaries of I, so we're de-identifying, in this case, what we're working with is the reality strategy of the individual. So this particular linguistic resourcing works with reality strategy. So, first question, what's the problem?

Second question, how do you know it's a problem? When did you decide that? Number four, I love this question, when don't you do it now? People in the back are going, oh, help. Oh, no.

And what are you deciding then? How is that different from how you were? How do you know that now? What other changes would you like to make? These are cookers.

I would like to warn you in advance. This is your brain. This is your brain on quantum linguistics? It did that? Okay.

You did that yesterday. You were a day too early. And tomorrow is another day of quantum linguistics. We have a whole other day, guys. Don't get too cocky about this.

It's like when they flipped open, they said, that's the end of the first two doors. I said, man, I can make it through. This is no problem. And he says, bring in eight more rocks. And I went, I know.

I know I'm going to die here. I just know it. And I had to reach back and grab everything I was worth. Tomorrow's another day. But it'll be a little different.

Do you have a problem? What's the problem? More rocks, right. Eight more rocks. Close the door.

It's dark out. Big boulders. Big red boulders. I think you guys are already cooked enough. I don't need to demonstrate this.

Just go do it. Okay? Groups of three. Different people. One group of four.

If you're doing this in the tape, please stop the tape and do the exercise. Okay, so how did that go? Are you guys toasties? Now, what have we been working on today? We've been working on the boundary conditions that comprise problems.

We've been working on the boundary conditions that comprise problems, and we've looked at problems in a number of different ways. But as I mentioned earlier, it's primarily time, space, matter, and energy, right? That's what we've been looking at. So there's a question. My question was that you'd basically just use these to loosen them up before you did an intervention.

Yeah. Would you use more than one on them, depending on what... Well, since each of these has a little bit different application, one of them's working on identity, one of them's working on... Some of them are working on relationship between the person and something else. Some of them are working on time.

It depends on what the presenting problem is. You choose an intervention specifically based on the nature of the presenting problem. We've given you a number of different interventions basically for specific presenting problems. But some of those can overlap. And so we sort of get to look at it that way.

Some of them can overlap, for sure, for sure. And what you want to do is look out at the client and notice if they're done. Done means that they had a significant physiological shift. Something happened. We notice that at least the model's loosened up.

I would suggest that if you're doing a full intervention with a client, you'd want to take a detailed personal history first and then go ahead and do whatever intervention you did, including the loosening up. All of that is in the model of therapy in section 5, page 1. And we're not there yet. We're going to talk about that. We're gathering techniques now.

We're gathering the trail of techniques. Would you separate them though? I mean, if you're going to do one, you know. I wouldn't do this at the same time as I did timeline therapy. I certainly would do it before.

But in the same, in the same session I might. These two would, say two of them loosen up, you know, their models. Yeah. Okay, one's time and one's matter or, you know. Whatever.

Would you space them out? No, the client will be spaced out enough when you're done. You know what I mean. Separate them or pile it on, that's what I want to know. Yeah, that's what I was wondering, if by piling it on at the start or splitting it between the interventions would be a better way of...

Personally, I would do quantum linguistics first in the intervention, and then if I felt I didn't get at the deeper level issues, I would go in and do timeline therapy for those. That would be the order and sequence that I would do that in. Okay. I've had this up on the slide here for a while, slide number 44, so let's do this together. You want to do this together?

This is kind of fun. You've already got this written down. I asked you to consider this question earlier. So I'd like you to consider it now. Could you, could you, and by the way, let's just go, let's go through, experience it, and then notice what happens.

Okay? Because we're going to come around and look at this again right after this. So could you, would you please, if you would, consider a problem that you know you have. Consider a problem that you know you have. And just nod when you've got that.

Now the question, and you don't have to answer this, just consider, what is it? Just nod when you've got that. And what is it, so the next question is, what is it not? And nod when you've got that. Now here's the next question.

What is it that you need to not know to know this? Okay. So now that you've considered that, thank you. Now, here's, here's the, the interesting thing is, linguistically, what is this pattern? This is an inductive language pattern, isn't it?

What is it? Sets the boundaries. What is it not? It goes outside the boundaries, doesn't it? Then, how do you know?

Sets the boundaries on your knowing. And then, what is it that you need to not know to know this? Goes outside the boundaries again. So, it's, it's actually a non-merriment reverse, isn't it? Non--reverse inductive language pattern.

Which we're going to come back around and discuss in just a few moments. It's a non-merriment-reverse inductive language pattern. What was your experience of this? What was your... What was your...

People are going, what experience was that? What experience? Who wants to share? Murray, right here. Well, on the what is it, you know, I got my problem, and what is it not?

There was this shift outwards. I felt space going outward. Then the how do you know, I just went blank good that's just like and that's what is that that's that moment of the void the void and and then the what is it that you need to not know to know this, there was this amazing spiral twist of submodality flash. Submodality flash, linguistically speaking. Well, I don't know how to do it.

It's like this cascading of pictures in an arc that just twisted and went down a thunder somewhere, and it's just like, whoa. What was that? That's good DNA, right, all the way. All the way with DNA. Okay, thanks, Murray.

One down in the front here. I had very similar experience with Murray, but one thing I noticed, I wrote down by accident, of course, what is it that you need not to know to know this, and I realized, I just changed it. It's far more powerful with need to not know. Far more powerful. You want to split the verb there.

Yeah, yeah. It is specifically that way. What is it that you need to not know? Here's another way to sort of get that is what are you pretending not to know or what is it that you're not knowing? Those are all similar kinds of questions to this that will work well in that regard.

Okay, well, what it is was a negative kinesthetic feeling. What it's not was a positive kinesthetic feeling. How did I know? Because I felt it. But what is it that you need to not know?

The positive feeling to know this. Exactly. Now tell me about the kinesthetic when you started with that. Oh, well, it's a kinesthetic. A negative feeling.

Well, I can tell you about the second one. It's fun. It's fun? Yeah. And the first one you started with, the problem state, what's the deal with that?

Is it gone? Has it changed? How has it changed? Yeah, it's changed because, like, well, why would I want that? Exactly.

Good. So what have we done in this case? We've run over the boundaries. So all of these exercises, and by the way, we've nicely, I think, installed this in your thought pattern, because all these exercises are essentially the same exercise, aren't they? They're just taking it, we're going over different boundary conditions that exist in the neurology of the client at the unconscious level, or in the client's neurology, and or at the unconscious level.

We're running over the boundaries. So by running over the boundaries, what happens is the boundaries actually can be assisted to be weakened or actually disappeared. I've been doing this inductively today. Haven't I? Because we didn't talk any theory.

So I think what we need to do next is to talk about some theory. Before we talk about some theory, how many people have, during any one of these exercises, noticed a blank moment? A moment of suspension? A moment where you entered the void? This is the void.

I want to mention, yeah, virtually everyone in the room raised their hand. I want to mention that, by the way, that you would spend years at a Zen Buddhist monastery for this. And it might cost you a fair amount of money. What is the void? The void is a place of infinite potential, a place of infinite possibilities, and when you drop into that, you go into that state of no mind, which the Buddha say is nirvana, where you realize you are the flower and I am the sap you are now enlightened you are the infinite bliss of the absolute you have the infinite choice to be or not.

This is the end of Tape 6, Side A.