# Entering Into The Void

That's the theory. Now the technique. Page 418. This is a Hiolani meditation. It comes from Huna.

This is the one we teach at Level 1 of Huna. We have a number of different meditation techniques, but this is kind of a fun one. And this is meditation on a light. So the first thing to do is to find a comfortable place to sit in it, like in a chair or on the ground, and darken the room or cover your eyes so that no external light gets in. This is really important the first time you do it that you're in a place which is really dark.

We're going to meditate a little bit so you have an experience of doing it here. And if you're going to continue with this particular technique of meditation, you may want to make sure that the first however many times you do it, the first few times anyway, that you are totally in a room where it's totally dark. Have you ever noticed when you get in a room that's totally dark, you can actually begin to see things? Yeah? What's not immediately obvious, at least from the point of view of Huna, is that there's an inner light.

And actually, Kukui, which are the nuts that people wear, Kukui was symbolic of the inner light. And so, perhaps you've been aware of this in the past, perhaps you haven't, but the fact is that according to all esoteric traditions on the planet, your own personal inner being or who you are at your essence is light. Who you are as an essence is light. So what we're going to do is we're going to pay attention to the inner light. And if I may quote Dionne Fortune just one more time.

She said, that's a little known fact, but absolutely true, that the only way to the great light is through the inner light. So the first thing to do is make the room dark. And if you want to, you can begin by doing breathing techniques. Ha breathing techniques are on the Huna tape set, or you can learn them in any of our introductory Huna trainings. Now, step number three, we only have to do it once.

We roll the eyes up to the right and then up to the left. And I think that was, by the way, does that sound like eye patterns? That particular rolling the eyes up to the right and to the left is in the chant, No Na Au Au, which is a Hawaiian chant, which is documented to be from at least 1500 A.D. So just in case you're wondering, what they're doing is why are they rolling the eyes up to the right and to the left to stimulate the visual part of the processing. And then they say roll the eyes straight up.

So like focusing on the spot on the wall like we did in peripheral vision, what you want to do is you want to roll your eyes up so they're far enough up as if you're looking at the sky. With your head, though, your head's going to be sort of level. And you can roll the eyes up even more if it's comfortable, but the one thing you do not want to do is you do not want to strain your eyes. So roll the eyes up as far as is comfortable, first to the right, then to the left, and then have them be right in the center. By the way, you're going to do this with your eyes closed when we do it.

And if you can remember the feeling of being in peripheral vision, can you all remember the feeling of being in peripheral vision? Take that into the meditation with you. Take that into the meditation with you. Step number four, as you look up to the space between the eyebrows, focus on the light, pay attention to the light, welcome the light, let it come to you and watch the light. Now, for some folks who are listening to these tapes and perhaps for some of you in the room, you may not see the light easily the first time, the first few times you do it.

If you don't see the light easily the first few times you do it, then what I want you to do is I want you to take your... Look up at me for just a second. If you don't see the light easily, I want you to... Don't do it right now. I want you to take your thumb and your forefinger, and I want you to press from the outside of your eyeballs more toward the inside.

Don't do it now. You're only going to do it once. And press up toward the space between your eyebrows, pressing from the outside and down. Press up and toward the inside. Okay, I'll say that again.

Take your thumb and your forefinger and press from the outside of your eyeballs upward and inward so that the pressure presses your eyes up and toward the space between the eyebrows. What this does is it stimulates the third eye and the pineal gland in the third eye, or in that area of the third eye. It stimulates the pineal gland to let go of some of the light that is in the pineal gland. The problem is, if you do this a lot, you may depotentiate the pineal gland, and you don't want to do that. Depotentiate means it may reduce some of the electrical charge that's in the third eye.

So you want to do this as little as possible, but if you need to do it in order to see the light in the first place, then go ahead and do it. And in which case, then, if you're not seeing the light easily, you're going to want to press upward and inward and just for a moment and then let go and then watch whatever you see. Have you ever pressed on your eyeballs real hard in the dark and you saw all kinds of colors and flashes of light and all that stuff? I used to do that when I was a kid all the time, right? Okay, what you're doing when you press on your eyeballs like that is you're causing the pineal gland to let go of some of the light that it's holding.

And then you can see that. Now, watch that light until it diminishes and diminishes and diminishes. So pay attention to that light as it gets less and less and less. And notice, ultimately, if you can see the light inside your head without pressing on the pineal gland. Okay, so now I'm going to assume you're watching the light.

This is step number five. And just let go and watch the light. If there are other thoughts there and you're paying attention to the light, it's okay. If you've forgotten to pay attention to the light, just bring your attention back to the light and focus on it again. And that's the process of Hiyolani or meditation on the light.

So, if you guys would like to do this together, let's see, we'll do this for a few minutes. We're going to actually spend just a couple of minutes doing this. And I'll talk you through the process of the first parts of the meditation. If you're listening to this on tape, and if you're driving your car, you may want to pull over. No, I'm just kidding about pulling over.

But you may want to not do that while you're driving your car. So if you're ready, why don't you just sort of settle back and find a nice comfortable place to sit. And just put aside everything, would you please? All of your thoughts of the day. All of the things you've been thinking about.

All of the things you've been involved in. And maybe just take a deep breath and then let it all out. And whenever you're ready, just go ahead and take your eyes and go ahead and roll them upward and all the way over to the right so that you're looking at visual construct inside yourself. And then all the way over to the left. And then roll them straight up so that they're looking straight.

Just straight up. And pay attention to the space between the eyebrows. You can roll your eyes up even further if it's comfortable. Just go ahead and roll the eyes right up so that you're looking at the space between the eyebrows. If you've been doing the peripheral vision with us along the way, then remember that feeling of the peripheral vision and take that into meditation with you.

And as you look at the space between the eyebrows, go ahead and focus on the light. Pay attention to the light. Just sort of easily focus on the light. Now if as you're doing this, if you're not finding the light inside your head easily, wait a minute and just pay attention. Now, I'm not suggesting the light's going to be, you know, bright spotlights.

It could be changing colors of gray or changing colors of dark red or even changing colors of blue. There don't have to be really bright lights. Just notice the quality and the color of the light inside of your head. It's not necessarily going to be really bright. It could also be something that you can just notice, maybe swirls and different things.

Different elements of swirls. And as you pay attention to the light, just sort of easily allow your attention to rest on the light as you pay attention to that. If you're not seeing the light yet, then you may want to do what we suggested, which is to press upward and inward on your eyeballs. Do it very lightly the first time. You want to press as little as is possible.

You want to press as little as is possible to... to stimulate the pineal gland to let go of its light, but not too much. And if you've done that, then pay attention to the light as it diminishes. The process is we're training our awareness to follow the light, the stimulated light inside. And so we then just bring your awareness back to the light. Pay attention to it.

Terima kasih telah menonton! Terima kasih telah menonton! Thank you. Terima kasih telah menonton! Thank you.

Terima kasih telah menonton! Thank you. Terima kasih telah menonton! Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening.

Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening.

Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening.

Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening.

Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening.

Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for listening. Thank you for Terima kasih telah menonton! Thank you. ¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶¶ Thank you.

Terima kasih telah menonton! Thank you. ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ Thank you................................................................................................................................. Terima kasih telah menonton! © transcript Emily Beynon................................................................................................................................ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ ¶¶ Thank you. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom.

Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom.

Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom.

Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom.

Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Shabb Okay.

Whenever you're ready, you may just want to rouse yourself up. If you're listening to the tapes and you want to go on and meditate, just go ahead and stop the tape now. This is the end of tape 15, side A.