# Parts, Constructing Reality, Time Scramble, Decision Destroyer

Next presupposition. Slide number 32. Did you ever think you have to know everything in order to proceed? How many people used to have that problem? Anyone?

I forget, right, exactly. Walter Heisenberg summed it up the best. This is called the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. It's part of quantum physics. Heisenberg said, we will never, ever know all there is to know.

We will never, ever know all there is to know. Heisenberg said this. It's not possible to know everything there is to know. Therefore, we will always have to proceed with uncertain, unclear, and ambiguous information and incomplete information. That's the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle.

Does that sound like anything? It sounds like confusion, actually. So, I don't know, I think roughly two-thirds of the room was in confusion last night. And how did you do? Very well.

Did you move to a new level of order? Exactly. Exactly. And actually, inductive language also does a similar thing, right? Because it operates on the boundaries.

It goes beyond the boundaries of what you thought. When you're chunking up a part, when you're chunking up in parts integration, the client may get to a certain level. You say, for what purpose? Client says, well, I don't know. It seems like, oh, that's all there is.

But you, but you intuitively know it's not a very high level of abstraction. What we're doing is we're gonna chunk the part up outside of its boundaries in parts integration. That's one of the things that makes parts integration work. That's why inductive language patterning works. It starts from specific and goes to abstract.

Brain, neurons, neurotransmitters, organs, all separate. In fact, they used to talk about the brain and the nervous system. Dr. Goodwin says that to talk about the brain and the nervous system as being separate is probably overly reductionistic. He says that our entire neurological system is one holographic complete unit.

And the neurons in the brain are the same as the neurons in the body. The neurons in the brain and the body are the same. In fact, you know, and you've heard me say this before, you have so many neurological connections in your body, you don't need a brain. No problem, right? Everybody's going, I don't have one left after yesterday anyway.

What are you worried about? In fact, in the book Megabrain by Michael Hutchinson, there's a really, really neat story about a guy that did an autopsy on a friend of his. He was a doctor in London, lived around the turn of the century. Did an autopsy on his doctor friend. And this guy had lived a full life, had 120 IQ, two kids, held down a great job.

When he died, his doctor friend did the autopsy. When they cut open his head, he had no brain. No brain. There was a brain stem, but no brain. He had hydroencephalus when he was born.

He had water in the brain, and he had no brain. And he lived an entire life normally with 120 IQ because nobody told him. Nobody said, oh, you poor thing. So the truth is, based on this research, you don't need a brain. In fact, I know you know people with no brains who are walking around.

Some of my best friends. Just kidding, just kidding. In fact, me, sometimes, yeah. Pribram says that the neurons, all of these, are totally holographic. Penfield says that they're non-local.

The consciousness is not able to be localized. And they're totally all integrated, according to Goodwin and also to NLP. So the final notion is that for most of the time we talk about the separation of others and of me. But the fact is that everyone and everything is intimately connected. At least that's where we're moving in terms of our thinking.

And of course, you remember the study we talked about with the teachers, a point of view about our students, a point of view about our clients will cause the clients to produce the results they produce. If you, if you actually hold an internal representation of someone of their magnificence, they will perform that way for you. And there's an exercise, it's a little harsh of an exercise to do, but it always works very, very well. And let me tell you that it works. And what the exercise is, is a group of three to five people in an LP get together, and one of the persons chosen at random goes out of the room.

And what we tell them to do is that this person, you just met them again after a number of years, and when you were young, they killed your dog in front of you. Then we have the person come back in, and the people holding that in consciousness talk to that person. Then they go outside of the room, and then they come back, and they say, now this person was your best friend through high school, and the same person comes back in the room. And they notice if they act differently to that person. And what I want you to know is this is a very, very effective exercise.

It's not really a comfortable exercise sometimes for people, which is why I don't particularly do it, but it is a very, very effective exercise. Because what it says is the entire group holding a point of view about a person will actually change the behavior of the person as they talk to you. And the truth is, even you as a practitioner, a master practitioner of NLP, if you can't see your client as magnificent, then you should refer them out. You should find another client to work with. Okay, so think about it for just a moment.

Because as you think about it, if the human nervous system is a hologram of the universe, then at any moment when you, no matter what you're thinking about, you're always more than that. Because your thoughts impose boundaries on the thought process itself. Or to put it as we said yesterday, in order to understand chair, you have to have boundaries up about chair to create chair and separate chair from not chair. So what does that say to you? Or what does it say to me?

What it says is that reality is a construction. We'll put reality in quotes. What it says is is that reality is a construction. That's why in some esoteric systems they say there's no such thing as reality. That it's a construction that goes on inside of you.

So we actually construct our own reality based on a number of things from the point of view of quantum physics. One of the ways we construct reality is through our observations. One of the ways we construct reality is through our observations. And what we create, what we observe, it's our mind that does the observation. When we're observing, we observe with our mind.

But essentially our observations are measurements. And these measurements actually will transform something, or actually transform nothing into something. But the truth is that all of these computations inside of us are computed through language. So what were the four things we just looked at a moment ago on the previous slide? We're on slide, by the way, 35 now.

Time, space, matter, and energy. Time, space, matter, and energy. So if a client has a problem, isn't the problem constructed out of what? Our observation of time, space, matter, and energy. If we have a problem, the problem is constructed out of time, space, matter, and energy.

Time, space, matter, and energy. And there's different ways we do problems from a quantum physics point of view. One of the ways we do problems is time. Another way we do problems is space. Another way we do problems is energy.

Space would be the same, yeah. I mean, among other things, space is the same as location, yes. It's a context, isn't it? But there are some things which linguistically we can identify, which is essentially, we're talking about quantum linguistics here. And linguistically, we've identified some of the major components that light up the neural networks.

So what we're about to move into is how do you then undo the stuff that's in the neural networks by knowing what are the linguistic components that pull out those parts of the neural networks, or actually that are part of the glue that holds this whole construction of reality together. In other words, we're going to identify today. Today, we're going to identify what are those things that the glue that holds together this construction of reality, what are they? And how do we then interact with those pieces individually? And we're going to look at a number of different ways of interacting with those pieces individually.

And time, space, matter, and energy are one of the filters. You said you couldn't understand the concept of transforming nothing into something. For all practical purposes, the notion of chair has got to be computed or measured somehow before we can sit in it. Now, that all goes on unconsciously, so we're not really conscious of it. But in order to know chair, we set up boundaries.

We have to know where the chair isn't, which is a matter of also figure ground in Gestalt psychology. It's a matter of what are you paying attention to, which we began this entire training by talking about focus, which is essentially what are you paying attention to. So in order to pay attention to chair, we also have to have something we're not paying attention to, which is not chair. Okay. With me so far?

I mean, such as we are. So a lot of how we do problem is bound up in time. A lot of how we do problem linguistically is bound up in time. Now think about this for just a moment. If a client had a problem that's different from a problem they have, it's something they had, isn't it?

But if a client says, I have a problem, that's different from a problem you used to have. But if we say to the client, go inside and try to have the problem you used to have, what happens then? Better yet, what happens if we say, go inside and try in vain to have the same problem? It was a terrible problem, wasn't it? By the way, this is in case you're furiously writing notes.

I can smell some of those pens screaming across the paper. That's a gustatory olfactory predicate. If you're in scrambling trying to grab that one, it's on page 40. Page 2. 40. What would happen if you...

What would it be like when you've made those changes? In the future as you look back and see what it was to have had that problem as you think about it now. If you could make this change for yourself so you could stop having made that change and see yourself now. Do you like the way you look? If you could make that change and look back at yourself having made that change now.

What happened here? What is this thing? Huh? It's ungluing the glue of the problem by changing verb tenses, or by changing temporal perspective, really. And let's look at page 240, because I'd like to talk for a moment about what are we really doing when we do an NLP pattern, and this one fits very well into this theory, this premise.

One of the things we're doing when we do an NLP pattern is we're actually doing five things. There's five things we're actually doing when we do a pattern of NLP. The first thing we're doing is we're associating the client into the present state. This is slide number 38. Well, yeah, time scramble.

Let's analyze what is page. What are we doing when we do this thing? It's the same thing as a swish pattern. It's the same thing as timeline therapy. This is primarily what we're doing.

This, by the way, is you can make up your own NLP patterns from now on. Remember we said we'd like to change how you think in addition to just giving you some techniques, which I'm sure you'll be happy to have techniques, but let's talk theory here for a minute. This is the valuable stuff. What is the basis of all of the NLP patterns? So what is it is?

It is first associate to the present state, then dissociate the present state. Then associate the client to resources and associate the resources to the present state. And then future pace the entire package, which includes the resources. That's how we do all the NLP patterns. That's all of the NLP patterns in a nutshell.

So what does this time scramble do? It says go inside and try in vain to have the same problem. Associates. It was a terrible problem, wasn't it? Dissociates.

You want to make changes, haven't you? Associate to resources. Get ready to associate to resources. What would it be like when you've made those changes now? Now we're associating to resources.

In the future, as you look back and see what it was like to have that problem, as you think about it now, if you could make this change for yourself so you could stop having made that change and see yourself now, associate your resources to present state? Do you like the way you look? If you could make that change, future pace, and look back at yourself having made that change now. This little line is right out of the book Timeline Therapy, but it's a pretty standard NLP process and or technique. So everything we do, so when you think of it, you can just do NLP without doing any patterns per se if you just do this.

Yeah? You could associate the client anywhere to resources. It could be past or future. In this example, the client's going out in the future. So what would it be like when you've made those changes now?

Yeah, that's still dissociating present state. You're still dissociating the client from present state. What would it be like when you've made those changes now is we're associating the resources and then this sentence down here, in the future as you look back to see what it's like to have made that change, notice what happens. It associates the resources to present state. You guys want to do this together?

This is fun. Want to do this on a problem you've got? Okay. So can you think of a minor problem that you've got? Those of you who are doing it with me.

Can you think of a minor problem that you've got? If you're listening to the tapes, it might be good to make sure you're not driving a car at this moment. If you are driving a car, stop the tape now. Okay, everyone got one? Okay.

So what I'd like you to do is go inside and try and really try in vain to have the same problem. It was a terrible problem, wasn't it? You want to make changes, haven't you? What would it be like when you've made those changes now? In the future, as you look back and see what it was like to have had that problem, as you think about it now, if you could change for yourself so that you could stop having made that change and see yourself now, do you like the way you look if you could make that change and look back at yourself having made that change now.

Now we're asking you, thanks for playing, we're asking you to make a fair number, we're asking you to make a fair number of computations at the same time. What happened? I don't know. Marcel, you're kind of... I'm a little spaced, yeah.

So what happened to the problem? Those of you that were doing it. Got lost in the confusion. Right, and remember we said, in quantum linguistics, confusion is an integral part of the process because you're going beyond boundaries. In this case, what was the boundary we were working on?

Time. Time. We're working on time, space, matter, and energy. This is one of the... So remember I said, what was this chair?

When we had this chair up in front of the room, I said, what was this chair 50 years ago? I can't even... Can you conceive of that? I can't even conceive what it will be like in 50 years. It could be an antique, but not that chair.

That's an antique plastic chair from a hotel. Hey, I'll give you 100 bucks for it. Oh, I don't think so. I can't see it. Can you?

No. So all of our NLP patterns relate to this kind of process. So let's do an exercise. And let's go to page 242 in your notes. Page 242.

And this is our decision destroyer. And this is actually a linguistic way of taking out a decision, conversationally. Now, let me suggest that this is a way to take out a decision. It is by no means as complete as doing a timeline therapy intervention to take out a decision, but in a quick fix situation or in a situation where you have to get the job done quickly, or in a situation where you're convincing someone of something, who already has their mind made up, hmm, this could be a useful process. Hmm.

So, first thing to do. Client says, I've made a decision. And by the way, when you're the client, I'm going to ask you to come up with a decision that you've made that you'd like to be free of or you'd like to get rid of. So you're going to pace the client back to the decision. I want you to calibrate the client.

So look at them and make sure that you've got the neural networks lit up. And you'll remember, as we were talking earlier, and I redid your exercise on the presuppositions, I made sure that your neural nets were lit up by asking you to restate the problem and going back. So we want to get the client so the neural networks are lit up. You can see the shift in the client's physiology as that happens. And you can say, where were you when you were deciding that?

Now, you don't want the client in the decision. This is only a temporary step. So you go to number three. When you've got them there, you go, well, the client says, well, maybe you could say I was in Cleveland or Hawaii. And you want to get them back before that.

So you say, just before that, where were you? Now is very important in step number four. You say, now, notice how many options that you have now. So you'd say, number four, now, as you think about your present situation in life, and we've got that in parenthesis so that you know that it's optional, notice how many options you have now. Okay?

And then you wait for the client to integrate. And then you say, think of that problem and notice how you feel now. And then step number six is you think about the next time you may do X or however the client described the problem. Knowing what you know now, notice how much better you feel. Okay?

That's the exercise. Groups of three and one group of four. And the group of four get with quick people. And let's see. So get together with someone and do this process.

I'll demonstrate this. Who has a problem? Actually, let's say, how about a decision which, as you think about it, currently limits you? Can you tell me what it is? Oh, excellent.

I love it. It's a decision that limits you professionally from using what you're learning here. I pray for this. Come on up. Please give him a hand.

This is the kind of demonstration that you pray for. All right, Matthew. So let's just define. Now what we're going to do is light up the neural networks here. Remember, all of this whole thing is we're going to light up the neural networks to make sure we've got the client, all of the neurology lit up from a quantum physics point of view.

So you don't feel you can use this professionally easily? Yes. Right. When did you decide that? Do you remember where you were when you were deciding that?

How long ago did you decide that? Probably a long time ago. Yeah. How long ago? Do you know?

We're still lighting up the neural nets here. We're still getting them back. Straight off the top of my head, I'd say birth. Birth. Now, see, I'm not clear about the decision, so I'm going to actually ask for a little more information.

So, like, you decided that at birth. What was the decision? No, the first time I worked with somebody. Oh, okay. Yeah.

First time I... First time you did NLP with somebody. Yes. First time I did any form of personal development work with somebody. But you mentioned birth, so what was going on at birth?

Feeling-wise, a struggle not being able to... a feeling of survival not being able to survive. And is that the same thing that came up for you when you were working with the person? Yeah. It's all around not being able to prosper, not being able for it to support me. Got it, got it, got it.

So the decision you made at birth, you remember more or less the decision. What were you deciding right before that? How will I do it? And before that, what were you deciding? As you think of that, do you notice how many more options you have?

Yeah. And how many more choices you have? Yeah. Nice color shift, by the way. Did you all notice the nice color shift?

Yeah? Yeah, it was really good. So as you think about the next time that you may be thinking of using something, as you think of maybe using one of these patterns or techniques in NLP professionally, how do you feel? What do you notice about how you feel? Enlarged.

More choices? Yeah. Excellent. Good job. Give him a hand.

Beautiful. Good work. Thanks to your unconscious mind, too. So it was really neat, because Matthew kind of lit up there. We noticed a shift when he got back to the first event.

We noticed a shift when he... And one of the things that occurred to me, because he mentioned birth, that I needed a little more content on that. We probably could have done that content-free from the first time he worked for it, but we're probably going to have a little more effect on his life by going back to his brain. So, essentially, what did we do? We paced the problem.

We got the client back to where he was when he was deciding. I had to ask him just before that, where were you? But I didn't feel like he was far enough back, so I asked him the question again before that. Now notice how many options you have now. Think of the problem and notice how you feel.

As you think about the next time you may use NLP in this case, knowing what you know now, notice how much better you feel about it. Any questions about that process? Because we'll do it as an exercise. It doesn't take long. I think we'll schedule five minutes apiece.

Yeah, this is pretty quick, pretty easy. You guys ready? Okay, so whenever you're ready, and if you're listening to the tapes, go ahead and stop the tape and do the exercise. This is the end of tape five, side A. Thank you.