# Values Exercise, Changing Values In Hierarchy

Okay, so what I'd like to do is the following. If you would, I'd like you to get together with the same people that you were just with and go ahead and do what we just did with some in terms of going through the values hierarchy you've got. You've got a values hierarchy now. And go through and identify, you've got them in order already, go through and identify any possible conflicts or how the hierarchy is based on the sheet of paper that you've got in front of you with all those things to do, which is essentially we're working from page 324. Yes?

Would you suggest that the list of persons ends? I don't think, here's the thing, I don't think you, if you have a lot of values, and here's my point of view. I guess I should say this. My point of view is that the first four or five values for a client are what's going to be acted upon. And once you get below four or five, they are less important.

Once you get down below the fourth or fifth value, the values themselves become less and less important. So you could simply focus on the top, oh, I don't know, five or ten, if you wanted to, in terms of checking out the toward, toward, away from conflicts, etc. Yes, question? What do we do if we do find a conflict? What do we do if we do find a conflict?

Nothing right now. If you do find a conflict, nothing right now. Just identify it. What I do is if I find a toward-toward conflict, I draw a circle around the number of the value and an arrow between the two and I put a T indicating a toward-toward conflict. We're not going to do anything just yet because we're going to do an intervention or we'll look at what possible interventions there might be for these issues.

And I'll demonstrate some of those interventions so that we can see. And then we'll notice what happens if the hierarchy actually changes when we do an intervention. So what I'd like you to do is go through now, identify the toward and away from the conflicts behind them, and we're going to use page 324, and go through and identify those. You don't have to go through all of them. If you have 20, go through the top 10 or whatever.

Find out toward, toward, find out toward, away from, and then also look at the logical level of abstraction and the syntax for that. What many people have done during this master track, and if you're listening to this tape set, I would also recommend this. What many people have done during this master track is they have actually taken and elicited the values in all six areas of life. Those values areas are on slide number 150. We already mentioned them earlier, of course.

But what some people have done is they've actually gone through and elicited all their values in all the areas so they can get really clear about their life and getting all the values areas harmonized and integrated so that there's no conflicts across values areas and so forth. This is a tremendous opportunity. You probably will only have this opportunity, well, unless you choose to take it in the future, you probably will not have time like you've got right here to do this. You have a real opportunity to go in and look at your life and get it in order. And what I would recommend is the following.

Finish up this exercise. Do what we suggested. Evaluate the values alignment based on the five tests on page 324. And then go through with someone else and elicit all the rest of your values and do the same process for all six areas of your life so that you can because we're how many people were surprised about something that you found in this process or how many people found something other than what you thought you might okay so there so what would you say about 60 70 percent of the people in the room were surprised at what something that happened this is a great opportunity and like i said there have been a of years in the Master Practitioner training here where people have actually sat down and they've taken the time at night and the time in the morning to just go through and really hone their values and get their whole life sort of integrated and clear out the away froms and clear out the conflicts and make sure that each of the six areas is in alignment. We're going to have more information on that and also how to do that coming up next, but I thought I'd give you that thought.

So if you want some homework for tonight, because there's no reading assignment for tonight, then what you could do is you could elicit the other six areas. Five areas, sorry, you've already elicited one, obviously. Elicit the other five areas, go through and do the same test, the five tests on page 324, the six things, and go ahead and find out and then make sure that they're aligned. Any questions? Yes, Lauren.

If she said, this stimulates my creativity, that it makes it better or something, would that have been a toward? If she said, this stimulates my creativity rather than more. No, I asked her what percentage was toward. What I said was, any time there's a comparative deletion, which is on number three, any time there's a comparative deletion, it doesn't mean there's an away from, but it means there's a red flag. So the red flag pops up, and then you investigate more.

If there's a comparative, you say, okay, well, and you say to the unconscious mind, is there a away from present here, and if so, what percentage? So a comparative doesn't mean that there's an away from, but a comparative means there is a red flag, something to look at, go, whoa, wait a minute, time out, what's up, and get clear with the client what that is. Yeah? So just because there's a comparative doesn't mean you got an away from. Just because there's, well, a negation definitely means an away from.

A modal operator of necessity doesn't necessarily mean there's an away from, but it could. So check the comparative deletions and modal operators. If they're there, then investigate a little further with the client. There's a question. So I'm just looking at these.

Since we didn't find toward and away from or, you know, when you asked me. No, we found toward and away from. We didn't find any toward-toward conflicts. Okay, toward-toward conflicts. So does this mean this is like what I'm left with?

No. No, we're going to do intervention. We're going to do an intervention. We're going to actually, you and I, Son, are going to complete this process and do an intervention, and I'll demonstrate that next. All we're doing right now is elicitation.

And we thought, just because this is NLP, we do a little utilization, too. So I demonstrated the utilization of this. But we are going to get to how to change values, how to align, and also how to align and integrate the six areas in terms of their order and sequence and how to make sure the six areas are all integrated, and also if that's the level of how you want them. So that's all going to happen next, but we're still in the elicitation procedure, and we're eliciting the aways and froms and torts, and we want to do that next. Question in the back.

I just need to be clear. The emotion I had before I was motivated, I would like to change it. Is it or is it not about it? What's the name of the emotion? Rejection.

And what's the context? It's the thing that motivates me to change careers. So career. So context is career. And it also goes into some other sectors.

Okay, wait. So in the context of career, is not being rejected important to you? I would like to change that. I know you would. In the context of...

We're just doing elicitation, right? The answer is yes, we can change it. Okay. The question is right now, as you think about it, in the context of career, is not being rejected important to you? Yes.

And in your hierarchy, did the word rejection, as in away from, end up being in the hierarchy? I don't know the answer to that question. Who has your hierarchy? Me. I mean, do you have your sheet?

Yes. You can open it up and look at it if you'd like. I'm just interested because here's the thing. Here's the thing. And by the way, there are some folks in the field of NLP who say we should write all these values as positive words, but I don't agree.

I think we should write them in the words the client gives us. And if not being rejected is important to her, then it's important to her, and she should know that it's in her hierarchy, even though she doesn't like it. It doesn't matter what we like. I hope you don't like it. If the area of life isn't working, I hope you don't like it.

So is not being rejected in your hierarchy? No. Okay, where should it be in terms of the top, or in terms of the order and sequence of the values, where should it be? I would like it to be at the top. So it is at the top.

I have rejection at the top. Oh, so you're moving away from rejection, and that's the number one value in your hierarchy. How I change or transition into a job or a new relationship is someone rejects me, I create it so the door is closed, and then I move. Whoa. Okay.

I want to change that. Well, I know you want to change it. I got that. Good. And we're going to.

Great. Okay. Is it a value? Yes. Okay.

Absolutely. Meanwhile, we need to tell the truth about it. And if that's your number one value, in other words, not being rejected, causing change, then that is the truth. And so if it's a number one value, perfect. And from what you described, that's why I said it should.

Could you hear it in her tone of voice? You guys listening to tapes and listening to her here, could you hear it in her tone of voice that it was a very important value to her? Very important. Very important value. And the rule of thumb is if her career isn't working, then there's a high up away from value.

Is your career working? No. So the rule of thumb is, okay, we're going to look for an away from. If that's the number one value, how is it, if that's what you're looking, because you're looking for that in the career, you walk in and you look, are these people rejecting me? Are these people, because if that's your number one value, that's important to you.

So are these people rejecting me? Are these people rejecting me? And if you look for that, if you focus on it, what are you going to get? Right. What you focus So it works for a while, but when I need to change or leave, I manifest the situation of being rejected, i.e. or having a door closed.

Right. So, fabulous that you noticed that. I'm totally impressed that you got that. And that's a life-changing thing. Now, if you were in a session with a client with whom you're doing a personal breakthrough, you know what you say at this point?

Yes. Because you got it. You got it. She's going to change her life. When we get done, she's going to totally change her life in terms of her career.

Because we're going to take that out, and you're sitting there going, all right, we got one. We got one. Lock it up. Close the doors. We got one.

So you got one cool. You know? And we're going to show you how to handle it coming up. Yay. So it's perfect.

We're right in the right place, but do the elicitation first. Okay. So, go do the exercise. And here's the exercise. I'll explain it one more time.

Do the elicitation of toward versus away froms for at least the top, what, half of the values. Find out if there's any toward-toward conflicts. Find out if there are any away-from-away-from conflicts. And then look at the logical level of abstraction in the syntax. And then utilize the values.

So you're going to test the utilization to make sure that you've got, the client should light up, should go into positive state. And that's the assignment for right now, and you should go do that. Then I'm going to also suggest that you do that in the other five areas. So if you're listening to the tape, take the time to do that before you go on. Get the other five areas elicited, because we are going to talk about different areas in life as we go on.

If you're going to do this exercise, please stop the tape now and do the exercise. Please go ahead and stop the tape right now. Welcome back. How was that last exercise? Whoa, wait a minute.

There's some dissension among the troops here. Whoa. Did you find some away froms? Whoa. For those of you listening to the tapes, the folks are barking now.

They're kind of grumpy. Okay, what questions do you have? Brian, yeah. After we finished eliciting my values when they were in the context of career, I came up with a number one value of learning and a number three value of fun. And I realized that, for me, learning is fun.

Learning is a lower chunk, which my number one value is a lower chunk, less abstract thing than a number three value. And I was wondering if you could discuss that. Yeah. To me, that's okay. I mean, I think learning is abstract enough that it's okay.

But what you've got is you've got fun as... See, you also want to look at the consequences of moving a value up, like making your number one value in career fun. Here's the thing, because we're going to be looking at what to do with the hierarchies that you all elicited during this last exercise. If you take a value that was nowhere on someone's values chart and you put it somewhere, like, for example, the example in our manual on page 327 would have us take some sort of value which is at the bottom of the upper chart here, which we marked. It says SMD on it.

That simply means a submodality shift. We're also looking at slide number 149. Let's say, just for a moment, Brian, that we take a value that wasn't on your hierarchy. If we take a value that wasn't on Brian's hierarchy and we make it number five, Brian will be somewhat motivated to do something about it. If we make it number four, he will be more motivated.

If we make it number three, he will be really motivated. If we make it number two, he'll quit his job to get it. And if we make it number one, he'll change his life. Okay, that's really the effect of moving values in the hierarchy. I have not done a shift with a client of the number one value in the hierarchy.

Now, first of all, I want to tell you that values change all the time, don't they? And we have significant emotional experiences in our life, and the values change, right? And values change automatically. I mean, so people, they do things, and stuff happens, and that's a technical term, stuff, and values shift. That's not unusual.

So I think it's okay to shift values with conscious awareness and cognition. I think that's fine, personally. The only thing I question then is what's the ecology of it. I would look, when I'm talking to a client, at what would be the effect of making fun the number one value. Making fun the number one value in your career might mean that you'd have to become a comedian.

That's what I did. Actually, I'm just kidding. Or am I? Or we could go a bit broader picture, entertainer. I think someone who does trainings ought to entertain.

That's part of my value structure around the training. So I don't think I'd ever have the number one value in a career be fun unless you were really sure that that's what you wanted to do. And with fun as a number three value, I bet you seek out fun a lot in what you do, right? Absolutely. Yeah.

So, I mean, to me, fun is pretty high. Fun is a pretty high value. Let me give you an example. This is one of my favorite stories. I work with a guy, and he comes to me, and he's 300 pounds, and he drinks a lot of beer, smokes cigarettes, and has high blood pressure, high cholesterol, and his father and brother both died when they were one year younger than he was when he saw me.

And I said, float above your timeline, look out in the future, and he says, there isn't one there. Whoa! Jeez! And like, he's freaked, I'm freaked. We're going, whoa, no!

Wrong question to have asked this guy, especially if he wanted a calm client. Fortunately, he was very big, so I could move more quickly than he. No, just kidding. No, I'm not. That was just part of me was.

And so one of the first things we did was to look at his values hierarchy. And I said, what's important to you? And this, by the way, is not in the six that I mentioned, but it's really important when you're working with clients who are dealing with issues about life. I said to him, what's important to you about living? And he gives me ten values, in the same way we just elicited them.

And I get ten values. And they're 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And I wrote them down, and then I re-hierarchied them, just like we did with Sun's values, on wall chart number 20. And before I did towards and away froms, I stopped for a moment and I looked at the values and I went, hey, to me, hey, there's something missing. So I turned him around and I said, do you notice what's missing from this values hierarchy?

He said, yeah, health. So in terms of his whole thing, all of his values about living or being alive, health was missing. So what we did was I took health and made it the number two value. I took health and moved it up to the number two value. And the way I did that was essentially what's on page 327.

We just created, I said to him, so in the context of living, if health were important to you, would you have a picture of it? So I assisted him and I talked him through the picture, assisted him in creating a rich map. We're going to go through this again, by the way, when we install a value, so at this point, this is just a metaphor. And I said to him, so as you go through this, what are all the things that you know you'll be healthy? And he said, well, I'd be eating lighter foods.

He used to eat massive amounts of ribs. Ribs. Is that it? Ribs. Cow ribs.

That's two words, ribs. Right? So he used to like his ribs, and he used to like his beer, and his pork rinds. He's big on pork rinds. You know them things that, yeah, okay.

They deep fry them. Pork rinds, by the way, are 100% fat. No carbs. And almost no protein. So they're really a valuable food to avoid.

Worse than a milkshake. Are you kidding? Milkshake is like low cholesterol compared to pork rind. So anyway, that was his diet. He liked it.

He wasn't much into vegetables. And so, because he was a good old boy. And one of the things we did was we assisted him in changing his values. And his value of health, we put in there food that was light, food that didn't make him feel heavy, exercising on a daily basis, feeling good about his body, and so forth. And so we built him a rich map of what that value meant and then shifted it. a submodality shift, very simply, which we're going to learn to number two.

Then just sort of left it there, noticed what happened, and then did, using timeline therapy, cleaned up anything that was not in alignment with having it be there. To be honest with you, I didn't really change, I didn't really go into the rest of the hierarchy because I am honestly a minimalist. When it comes to an intervention, I like to do the least amount of intervention possible to get the results that the client and I both want to get. So, for example, among other things, if something doesn't come up during the interview, the detailed personal history that occurs before we do an intervention, if it doesn't come up and it hasn't come up at all during the therapeutic part of the intervention or during the intervention part, I probably, unless I have an insight that it's important to the problem, probably won't bring it up. Probably won't bring it up.

So we did that, and we also took out any, in the past, any, using timeline therapy, we took out any decision that he might have had to be big or to have protected himself or any need to protect himself with physical body to keep the weight on so that he could let it go. And that was the extent of the intervention, and I think it took about three hours. Six months later, because he was from Phoenix, six months later I called him on the phone and I said, hey, how's it going? And he goes, oh my God, he said, you changed my life. I said, well, what did you do?

Because I certainly realized that I'm just the tour guide. And he said, I stopped drinking immediately, stopped smoking, and started walking instead. So all the time that I had for drinking and smoking, I spend walking. And I do walking. He said, I've lost about 60 pounds.

And of course, he had a fair amount to go still. He said, I've lost about 60 pounds. He said, and the other thing that happened is all of my friends that I used to have are no longer my friends. Because, why? Because I won't go drinking with them.

And our whole friendship was based around us going drinking. So they didn't feel like, so I didn't want to go to the bars because I don't drink or smoke anymore. I didn't want to put myself in that situation, he said, and they didn't feel like I was a friend or could be a friend if I didn't go with them. He said, but it's more important to me, listen to the words, he said, but it's more important to me to be healthy. Right?

So he said, more important to me to be healthy, so he said, I've now got some new friends who I've met at Gold's Gym where I'm doing weight training three days a week just to make sure that as I lose the weight, I stay in shape. So that's a life change. That's a major life change for a guy in three hours. And the major intervention was simply getting rid of anything that was in the way of shifting health up to number two. So your question is a good question.

And like I said, so if we were to look, let's say, at the top five, I think if you look at the top five values in a hierarchy, those are the ones that are going to make a difference to the client and to you. The number five, so to me, there's not a lot of difference between a value, whether a value is at 10 or 11. If somebody says, I can't decide whether it's 10 or 11, fine, just get it down on the paper, we don't care. If a client says, I can't decide if it's 4 or 5, there's not a lot of difference between 4 and 5. There's a great difference between 1 and 5.

There's a great difference between 2 and 5. But between 4 and 5, or 3 and 4, there's not a lot of difference. But something that's way down on the bottom, and there's actually not a lot of difference between 1 and 3, Because the values we act on, the values we tend to pay most attention to, and that mostly affect who we are and what we do, are going to be the top five or so values. We might even say the top four. I don't think that, I think if a client came to me and asked me to shift a value with him or her, that if I were taking that value, if I were to move that value up to, let's say, if a client said to me, I think the value should be number six.

I don't think I'd bother. And I'd say to the client, well, that's not going to make a lot of difference, probably. If a client said, I'd like to shift it up to number five, maybe. Four and above is where it needs to be. So, Brian, the difference between value being at three and number one, to me, is okay.

To me, it's okay. And what'll happen is, is that, I mean, the purpose, to me, the purpose of doing value shifts, and we're going to demonstrate some here today. The purpose of doing a shift in values is so that the client themselves, or himself or herself, can have the experience of the value changing dramatically in terms of relative importance. I don't think that this guy needed to have health for the rest of his life. In other words, I don't think he needed to have health as the number one value for the rest of his life, either, by the way.

And my guess is that once he got his health down to a normal weight, oh, by the way, I've got to tell you about the rest of the story. I didn't finish the story. So then I had him look at his timeline. There wasn't a future out there, so I had him build a nice future out to age 95. And he created a really nice future with him being healthy, and we put all that in the future.

And to my knowledge, today he's still alive. I'm pretty sure that, I mean, we knew each other well enough that I would have heard from some of his friends that if he wasn't still alive. And the intervention that I did with him was 1988 or 89. Probably 1988 or 1989. So I feel relatively certain that the intervention assisted him in his longevity.

I mean, I can't imagine, I don't know about you, but imagine a client who comes to you who has no future timeline because he or she feels that that's the way it was in the family. By the way, both his brother and his father were overweight, just like he was. So that's what will happen with a value shift. If you do a value shift, it'll, it'll make a major difference like that. Now, personally, I have never shifted a value up to number one.

I have been, I have been willing to shift values relatively in the hierarchy. That is to say, not the, the values categories relatively. I've been, I've been willing to shift values categories relatively. Like, and we're going to talk about how to do that today too. Like, for example, how to shift, how to have a shift in one of the areas of your life becoming more important than others.

Or, I have been willing to shift values in a hierarchy, but I have not changed the number one value for the client, primarily from an ecological point of view. This is the end of tape 25, side A.