# Logical Levels Of Therapy

So when you get frustrated, you eat. Is that the program? Your mother does it too. Oh, great. Now she's helping.

I don't get that aggravated. You don't get that aggravated, yeah, anymore. Okay, let's see now. What's this problem now? Tell me again so I can be...

When I get really upset with something, I have this urge to just run to the fridge and eat because when I eat a lot, I can't do anything about thinking. I just have to digest my food. Hmm. I see. Okay, okay, okay.

So what would you like to do instead? I'd like to get rid of that feeling inside of me that sort of churns, that encourages me to run to the fridge. Or because, I mean, life happens and things happen to upset us. What if we just simply change the response of what happens when you go to the fridge? And I'm looking at the ecology of this thing.

It seems to me that if it's time to get upset, it's time to get upset. And I don't think I'd want to personally take that away from you, per se. No, it's okay to get upset. I just don't want to have that feeling of racing to the fridge. Great, okay.

So we're going to separate those two. And let me just ask you a couple of just simple questions. I'm still gathering information now. But you'll notice the quantum linguistics of the information now. So is there ever a time when you get upset and you don't go to the fridge?

Yeah. Good. There is. And is there ever a time when you go to the fridge and you're not upset? When I'm hungry.

When you're hungry. And is there ever a time when you don't go to the fridge and you're not upset? Is there ever a time when I don't... I'm just asking. I don't go to the fridge and I...

Well, yeah, I don't go to the fridge. Yeah, okay. Good. Just checking. Okay.

All right, so let me see if I got this right. How do you do this? How do you do the process of when you get upset going to the fridge? I mean, it's not something you forget to do, is it? No.

No, it's not something, I mean, because there are some times when you don't get upset that you don't go to the fridge, right? So you don't forget to do it then, do you? I don't understand what you're saying. That's right. And it's good to not understand that.

Now, let me just ask you another question, because I'm curious. How in the world, because some people would like to have this ability. It's a good ability, I think, that you can do this. I mean, that you get upset and you go to the front. People like to link in things, because I would like to remember to balance my checkbook.

Yeah. And? Well, whenever it was time. So maybe, you know, this is a valuable strategy for people to... I don't think it's a good strategy.

Oh, you don't? No. No, because I don't feel well after. You don't? I just go to bed.

Just go to bed. All right. Well, let me just ask your unconscious mind, and if we were to take out the strategy, are there other ways that your unconscious mind could deal with the upset that would be positive for you? Great, so I'm just asking an ecological question now, right? Okay, good.

All right, so how do I do it? How do I do this? How do you get upset? No, how do you do it? How do I get upset?

How do you do it? Like, for example, you get upset. Can you do it now? Can you do it right now? Can you, like, remember a time when you got upset?

I don't have a fridge. Well, there's one upstairs in the hotel. I mean, I just want to see if you can actually produce a behavior. If I can really get upset? Yeah.

Can you remember a time when you got upset and get the feelings of wanting to go to the fridge? That would be really good. This, by the way, is useful to know when you're done. When you're doing a behavior with a client, it's really useful if they can produce the behavior in the office. So can you remember a time when you got upset and get the feeling of wanting to go to the fridge?

You can. Can I close my eyes? Do you want me to do that? Please do. Remember a time when you got upset.

And by the way, this is how do you do it. Can you do it now? So we're really asking her, can she do it now? So can you remember a time you got upset? And can you get the feelings of wanting to go to the fridge?

You can, can't you? Good. Susan's nodding her head yes. Great. Okay, Susan.

So let me just ask you a question. You can come on back. I just want to ask you a question. How do you produce the behavior of going to the fridge? How do you do that?

I hear something that somebody says. Yeah. That upsets me. Here comes the strategy. So you hear that, and that upsets you.

Yeah. I hear something somebody says that upsets me, and I get this grungy, naughty feeling in my belly. In your belly? In my belly. And then what happens?

What happens next? And then I... Like, how do you know it's time to go to the fridge? It's almost like it's a magnet that I... I mean, do you have a picture, or do you say something to yourself, or is there a certain feeling there?

No, it's a feeling. It's pulling. It's like being pulled in. So you get a feeling. You have the grungy feeling, and then you have another feeling after that.

Then I have another feeling. It's almost as though I'm not really in control. I'm sort of sleepwalking, and I just find myself in the kitchen. Great. Okay, this is good.

This is good. So let's just rewind that just a little bit. It may not be just the fridge, it could be the cupboard, too. Yeah, yeah, I'm fine with that. Okay, so that's good, that's good.

So let's rewind, let's rewind that just a little bit. So you've got the feeling, the feeling right here in the stomach, right? What's the next thing that happens that, that you know it's time to go to the fridge? Is there a picture that you know it's time to go to the fridge. Is there a picture?

Is there any words you say to yourself? What's the next thing that happens? Or is it another feeling? Let's check that again. I think that the feeling from here moves right up to here because I kind of could feel it right now in my throat.

Okay. Then before you go to the fridge, the minute you get the feeling in the throat, before you go to the fridge, do you have a picture? Or do you say something to yourself? I think I say, I don't want to deal with this now. Good.

And then what happens? And then I don't, because I deal with something else. I do something else, so I don't have to deal with it now. And how do you know what to do? Oh, this is an old family pattern.

I could see my mother getting angry on the phone. You can see your mother getting angry on the phone. Yeah, and then watch her as she just happens to open up the cupboard and starts to eat something. Okay. It's really quite unbelievable.

Okay. So, and then what? So, you get a feeling, the grungy feeling, then you get the, then the feeling moves up to your throat, right? And then you say something to yourself, I don't want to deal with this right now. And then you have a picture, seeing your mother.

And then do you know it's time to go to the fridge, or is there something else that happened before you go to the fridge? Do you do this just once, or do you have to do it a number of times? This makes her the expert, by the way, now. So we're really acknowledging her expertise in this. No, I don't think I do it more than once.

Just once. Do you go by the time you got the picture? Or do you have another feeling? I imagine I just see my mother. The funny thing is my mother is very, very fat and really bothers me.

Yeah. And I'm doing this really weird behavior. Yeah. So you're seeing your mother. Are you then, are you going right to the fridge or is there something else that happens before you go to the fridge?

No, I think I just go to the fridge and I eat and I go to bed. I feel better. I never get sick. It doesn't matter what I eat. It's really quite amazing.

Absolutely. I'm not sure it's a useful behavior. Can you help me with this? Imagine for a moment that I was going to fill in for you for a day and have your problem. I mean, say I was from a temporary agency.

That's a fairly stupid thing. But I've been hired to do this, let's say, right? So I'm going to fill in for you. I'm going to be you for a day. I'd like to know how to do this, because I'm not really clear yet on, like, what do I do?

I know I have to get upset. Well, I'm going to be upset. I'm going to, like, hear somebody, take a phone call, whatever, or hear something. And then I'm going to have a feeling. Now, the first thing is, what's the first, I forget, I get the feeling of upsetness.

In my belly. And then what? What do I do then? Upsetness kind of grunges at you. I got to grunge it at me?

Yeah, it grunges at you. The belly, that's the feeling you get. How do I do that? Do I do that with sort of widening waves of comfort? No.

No. No, it's not comfortable. It's not comfortable. Well, could it be and have it still work? No.

No, no, it couldn't be. Okay. You sure? All right, so what happens next? What am I going to do next then?

After you get the feeling in your stomach? Yeah. What's the next thing? You're going to get like a lump rising up to your throat. A lump of what?

It just feels like it's blocked. Like, sort of like, sort of a fun, tickly feeling rising up to your throat? No. No? Huh.

Could it be and have it still work? It couldn't be. Oh, man. I hope I don't forget how to do this. Yeah.

Let me try this again. So I've got this not fun tickly feeling in my stomach, right? And it's, but, but when it rises up to my throat, does it, could it then go, it goes out my arm, right? And then squirts out on the floor. No, it sort of stays there.

Oh, it does. But it doesn't disappear before it gets there, does it? Could it and have it still work? Maybe it could still work if it was just in your stomach. Maybe.

Oh. So if it stayed in my stomach and felt like that fun, tickly feeling, I think Jonathan Winters used to say, what did he say? That little tickly feeling in my... No, no, it's the grungy feelings in your stomach. Oh, sorry.

I do this well. Yeah. You did, didn't you? I did. It was a problem.

Yeah. Okay, so the feeling... Help me with this now. So we've got the feeling... Yeah, let's forget about that for a minute.

What's the next thing I've got to do? I'll come back. What's the next thing I've got to do? Do I... You said I have to say something to myself.

What do I say to myself? Do you remember? I forget. I to yourself for me to do this. Didn't I say I have to go to the fridge?

I don't think so. I don't remember what I said. Yeah, me too. But could I say it? Very relaxed.

Very comfortable. When I said that? No, because then I wouldn't... I'd just stay where I was. Go to sleep, I think.

Go to sleep. Is it your voice when you say that in yourself, in your head? That I have to go to the fridge? Yeah, I forget. You didn't tell me.

Did you tell me whose voice it was? Well, I guess it's my voice because I'm doing the action. So if I'm going to do this, I have to do it in... In your own voice. Mickey Mouse's voice wouldn't work, would it?

No. Could it be and have it still work? No. It couldn't. It would be silly.

It would be silly. Oh. Sorry. It would be silly. Oh, no.

Help, help. I can't go to the fridge. I'm going to... Just relax. Okay.

I didn't forget. Okay, okay. So, wait, wait, wait, wait. I don't think this is so funny. No, I don't either.

What happens next? Because I want to make sure that I do this. Then I go to the fridge or the cupboard and I eat as much as I can. Well, you said there was a picture. Is there a picture?

Oh, I saw my mother. Oh, yeah. I saw my mother. I saw my mother. I love my mother.

That's not a small dark picture far away and in the other corner of the room, is it? What did I just do then? I actually grabbed the picture and moved it out. That's actually manipulation of some modalities using my hands. So the picture isn't small and dark and all the way in the corner of the room there's like a little post stamp.

Well, could it be? And have it still work? Maybe. I kind of want to forget to go to the fridge. We're that far out.

Do I? It just doesn't seem to have the same urgency. Right. You know, I have another problem, too. I'm sorry to tell you this.

My mom's kind of thin, actually. I don't know if she goes to the fridge. Sorry, that was just an aside. I don't know what that means. An aside.

I don't know what that means. What was the problem? I forget. Let's try this. Can you do it now?

No, can you do the behavior? Because you said there were times when you got upset but didn't go to the fridge. I just wonder if you can, and Susan, I'd really like you to try to create that old behavior. Because you said a moment ago you could get the feeling of wanting to go. I want you to try.

And I want you to really try. And see. Or you may find that you cannot. This makes me laugh. Oh, man.

Susan, what's going to happen? You came up here for five minutes. We talked a little bit. Your problem disappeared. In the future, as you think of it now, if you don't do that, what other things will you do instead to make yourself feel good and be really comfortable about it?

Your unconscious mind could think of other things, could it not? Yeah, I'm going to breathe. Breathe. I'm going to breathe. That makes me always feel better when I do some good deep breathing.

Yeah. Because, I mean, you know, you're from the East, right? Stuff happens, you know? So, the way I figure, you know, we might as well have a strategy for dealing with it instead. You could be comfortable doing something else.

Yeah, I'd really like that. I'd like that. This is so stupid. Yeah. Well, it was a problem, wasn't it?

Yeah. I want you to try to do that again, I'm not totally convinced that the behavior has disappeared now. To do, to do. To try. To do, to do.

To do that behavior of, because before you said you'd get back that old feeling of getting upset and then wanting to. Can you try now? Just really try. In vain. That's good, Susan.

So every time she tries now, what have we got? I feel like about six years old. Perfect. That's good. Good job.

Now, here's the other thing. I would handle, because there's some underlying stuff about it, about the upset. I would handle upset using timeline therapy, and we will get to that during timeline therapy. Let me ask your unconscious mind if you can be comfortable until we get to timeline therapy, because these people here have gotten rid of a lot of their negative emotions. We've got to have at least a few for them to get rid of.

So can you save that? That would be all right. I don't even know what I'm saving. Oh, maybe the upset. Oh, just the upset from the past that you...

Oh, I don't know. Maybe you're fine. Oh. I'll say this. If there's anything else that we would normally do to get rid of the negative emotions associated with that, we'll do that during timeline therapy.

Okay. Yeah. Okay. Great. Good job.

Thank you, Susan. You're welcome. That was really good. That was magnificent. What fun, huh?

That was, I think, a really clear example of logical levels of therapy, and the most effective part was when we got the picture out there, wasn't it? And my point of view is therapy ought to be fun, so I demand laughter of myself. Not of the client, necessarily, but I demand laughter of myself when I'm doing this, because I figure life is pretty serious. And we're not going to get out of it alive. So we might as well have fun while we're doing it.

Anyway, let's see. Are there any questions that anyone has about logical levels of therapy? Because then we're going to do an exercise. Yes? I did not hear you, as the term was expressed earlier, I didn't hear you meta-model her.

Step number two, you don't actually do the meta-model. You simply identify patterns. So you're not actually going to do the meta-model. I put it there, though, because what it does, it is one of the levels of logical levels, but technically it simply, it says here on slide 89, it says use metamodels simply to identify the patterns, so you have them in mind. So the major patterns that were present was, of course, was that when she began, she had a problem, and when we got done, we denominalized it, turned it back into a process, and she noticed that that was, this is pretty much what we predicted, and it was also cause and effect, and she noticed that now she's in charge of that, in charge of her response.

Yeah. Right, so I didn't actually, the process is not necessarily to do metamodel, unless you need to, but to simply take and interrupt the strategy. Yes? Tad, when you did your ecology check, is it enough for your client just to mention what alternatives they'll have, or would you go an extra step and install it? I think I want a client with, of course, normally I'd be doing timeline therapy, right, afterward to future pace it.

So I'd have her have a nice, if this was simply the presenting problem we worked on, I'd have a nice future pace using timeline therapy, putting some other events into the future for her. Since I was using logical level therapy alone, I wanted her to come up with other things, other behaviors, and of course she did. And so when I asked her, so what are you going to do instead when we got all done, she said, I think I'll breathe. So we were, I think, at future pace rather nicely based on the ecology check. I did what I did, and that's probably what I would do if I was only doing logical level therapy.

And I would do more if I was doing that plus timeline therapy. I would do the nice future pace of creating your future, the part of the timeline therapy where you put things in the future. Okay, other questions? Great. So here's the process.

We're going to do this as an exercise. We'll do this groups of two. So client has a presenting problem. And as best as possible, it's a behavior. And so what we'd like to do is to simply run through the process.

We'll use page 235. And we'll go one. Actually, remember, as Joe pointed out, we skipped number two. We go from one to how do you know to do it, when do you do it, how do you know it's time to do it. Some other questions are when do you not do it, and can you do it now.

Those are all similar questions of this step. Then the next step is to have them teach you how to do it. Have them teach you how to do it. That makes them the authority. You can use the word temporary agency.

And then finally, you're going to take it out to the limit. And one of the key words on taking it out to the limit is, well, could it be and still work? Okay, so that's the process. If you're listening to the tapes, it would not be appropriate for you to work on this for phobia necessarily until you also are capable of doing timeline therapy, the phobia model and timeline therapy. So go ahead and do this with another person, 15 minutes apiece, groups of two.

If you're doing this with the tapes, then stop the tapes now and do the exercise. Stop the tapes now. This is the end of tape 10, side B.