# Peripheral Vision, Holographic Nature Of Memory, Mind-Bodyconnection

So just for a second, what I'd like you to do is noticing when you're in that state, what happens to your focus? What happens to your focus? When you go into that state, when you go into that state, what happens to your focus? Murray? It's blurred in a sense, and yet I'm aware of much more at the same time, even though centrally I'm not really seeing so clearly as normal, and yet I'm taking in everything in the room.

It's easy. Yeah, yeah. Now, before you were focused on what, and what are you focused on when you go into this state? In other words, still looking ahead, but everything around sort of comes in. Yeah, everything around, and what is everything around?

Well, movement all around, in other words. Right, you're getting there. Who has an idea about what you're focusing on when you're actually in this state? In terms of, I don't know if you've thought of this before, but when you're focusing on the central part of your vision, are you focusing on content? And when you're focusing on the peripheral part of your vision, are you focusing on...

Process. Context. Context. You are, aren't you? Because when you say, Murray, when you say, when you look at that, you're focusing on, you know, you kind of focus in, then you're focusing on everything around.

Right. Is that right? Yeah. So are you focused on context then? I mean, neurologically?

Yeah, I guess I would be, huh? Yeah. Think about that for just a moment. Think about that for just a moment, because I do want to talk about context and content. I want to talk about context and content, and I think that, I think I want to talk about it in this way.

Let's look at slide number 11. Alfred Korzybski in the book Science and Sanity in 1933 said the map is not the territory. Actually, he talked about, and I don't know if you know, if you've ever considered what that means in terms of the presuppositions of NLP. Of course, we've had lots of discussions. The map is not the territory.

People go, yeah, yeah, okay, the map's not the territory. Sure, sure. I don't know if you know what that means, but what it is, and Krasivsky actually in his book said, someday in the future, this was in 1933, someone will come up with a purely processed description of the human being, which of course we think NLP is a purely processed description of the human being. What do we focus on when we focus on structure, process, or context is we focus on the pattern that exists. So although we may have lots of content, what we're looking for as we look at our NLP patterns is we're focusing on structure, process, or context.

In fact, what does the map is not the territory mean? What Korzybski said was, he said the words we use are dependent upon the context in which they appear for their meaning. All of the, did you ever, I don't know if you know how they make a dictionary, but if you were going to make a brand new dictionary and you didn't want to borrow Funk and Wagnalls or Random House or whatever dictionary you've got, you know how you'd make a dictionary? You'd actually buy up all the books in print. This is how you do it.

And you'd make a three-by-five card for every word that you found in each of the books that was unique, and you'd determine the meaning of the word from the context in which it appeared. That's pretty much how they make a dictionary. Then they go out and talk to people and find out if there are any words they don't have. And they usually find quite a few. And then they determine the meaning of those words from the context in which they appear.

What Krasivsky said in Science Insanity was that all words are dependent upon the context in which they appear for their meaning. Which, if that's the case, if that's the case, if all meaning is dependent upon the context in which it appears, if all meaning is dependent upon the context in which it appears, then the only meaning is context, process, or structure. The only meaning is context, process, or structure, if the meaning of words is dependent upon the process, the context in which they appear, which it seems to be. You know why that's so? You know why that's so?

It works kind of like this. We're looking at slide number 12. Typically what happens is that we have some experience. We have some... This, by the way, is a similar diagram to our little man that we looked at a moment ago with the filters inside on page 1-4.

What normally happens is we have some experience and we make an object of that experience inside our head. That's the internal representation. After it's filtered, of course, and then those objects that we make, they all have labels. So we attach labels to those. And typically people tend to abstract label after label after label.

So a lot of our description... So first of all, it's impossible to directly experience our experience neurologically because you have to have some representation inside of the experience. So we're already once removed from our normal outside experience, and then we attach labels to it. Do you want to see how that works? Let's look at wall chart number one, which is in section nine of your notebook.

Okay? Now, let's play a game. You guys want to play? Let's do some role-playing, okay? What I'd like you to do is I'd like you to play what we're about to do as though it were real.

And then notice what you're feeling inside. Okay? So we're going to do some role-playing, and I'm going to scold you. And then I want you to notice what you feel inside and tell me the name of that feeling. Okay, you ready?

Okay. You should have done what I asked you. Okay, so what are you feeling? What were you feeling when I said that? Rich?

Anxiety. Anxiety, okay. And I'm going to write these right on wall chart number one. What else? Get your favorite one out.

Confusion. Confusion. Okay. Guilt. Guilt.

Surprise. Surprise. Anger. Anger. What else?

Fear. Fear. Okay. What else? You naughty boy.

I'll put an exclamation point after that one. Rejection. Rejection. What else? What do you want from me?

What do you want from me? Okay. Sinking. You felt sinking? Okay.

I felt humiliation. Okay. You have an excuse. Lauren says, I have an excuse. Let's see.

Oh, I like that one. Leave me alone. Leave me alone. This is not fair. This is not fair, okay.

That's what Bart Simpson said. Did you all hear? That's what Bart Simpson said. Bart Simpson, the great American philosopher, said, see, I didn't do it. Nobody saw me do it.

You can't prove anything. No, I shouldn't have. No, I shouldn't have. Okay. Okay, this is a pretty good set here.

So let's just stop for a moment and let me, let's see if we can put these in, in, in sort of, what I tried to do as you did it was to sort of put them in a, a level of abstraction. So, let me draw a line here, and let me draw a line here, and one here, and another one here. And what I attempted to do is to write these in terms of their level of abstraction, clumping all of these together. So if we put an A at the top of the page, which would be abstract, and an S at the bottom of the page for specific. Now let's look at each of these, each of the examples that we got from you in terms of their level of abstraction.

The most primary description of what's going on inside your body is going to be a description of the actual content that you're feeling at the time. So, who felt a sinking feeling? Yeah, so the sinking feeling is almost right at the object of experience without a label attached, isn't it? Then we attach the first label and we actually have an emotion. So we've got anger, fear, anxiety, confusion, surprise, guilt.

Humiliation could be there, but my guess is that humiliation and rejection are a bunch of emotions that have other emotions involved in them. That's my guess. And then, look at all these things we have here, like you naughty boy, which was like one of the first ones that came up. How do you feel that? I wonder, how does someone actually feel, I have an excuse, or how do you feel this is not fair?

Because people say it all the time, I don't feel this is fair. How do you feel that? That's a common parlance, common thing that people say. So, if you look at this now, we've got a little chart here, from abstract to specific on wall chart number one, what you'll notice is that there are certain levels of abstraction, and what I'd like to point out is the further you get from here, which is the bottom level, right, it's specific, the further you get from the description, or actually even into the major negative emotions, the further up in the thing you go, though, the further you get from actual feeling. And if you get a client who abstracts their emotions way up in the top level and abstract where they're constantly saying to themselves, well, I'm feeling like leave me alone.

How do you feel that? So what happens is they're way far away from actually experiencing their feelings. That's what it means when we say the map is not the territory. That's what it means when we say that what we do is we have an experience on slide number 12, and we can't really even directly experience that, so we have an object of experience, which has lots of labels that we attach to it, lots of things that we attach to it, and we move to this level. Interesting, isn't it?

So that's language. Where are we on our little chart here? We're at language. We're at that filter called language, page 1-4. We're right at that filter called language.

There's something else going on here, too. Because not only are we tied up in language, but language is stored in the body in a certain way. Actually, everything that we experience is stored in our body in a certain way. And if I may say this, this is what really gives me hope about our future. So this is really exciting for me.

Let's look at wall chart number two. And this is how... This is my take on how memory works in the body. Let's talk about it for a moment. If you had a 3x5 card in front of you as you listen to these tapes, you can follow along with what I'm doing.

So according to Dr. Paul Goodwin, memory is stored holographically in the nervous system, in the body. Dr. Paul Goodwin is a neurophysicist at Alaska Pacific University who several years ago I spent some time with as I began to sort out in my mind the notions of quantum physics and the quantum nature of the human being. Actually, Paul and I spent some time together in 87, 88, and 89 chatting about various things.

And the thing I like about Paul is he's a real theoretician. So I said, Paul, do you know what this means? We could do this, this, and this. And one of the things he said was, I'm not interested in that. I'm just interested in the theory.

He's a real, you know, theoretical guy. So he left, he said, I'm going to leave the applications to you. That's your job. One of the things that really gives me hope, see, my mother still doesn't know what I do. She has, she has no idea what I do.

And one of the things that gives me hope is that, you know, even the traditional psychological or medical community had no idea what we did 10 years ago. But something happened in 1985 and 86. Something happened. And what happened was that quantum physics actually accepted, I think Carl Prebram pointed it out as early as 1960, but quantum physics actually accepted the nature of the holographic storage of memory in the nervous system. So for the first time, for the very first time, theoretical quantum physics accepted the notion that, about 1985-86, with the work of Deepak Chopra, that the body is actually a quantum mechanical device.

And these, by the way, are important concepts for this master practitioner training. That the body is actually a quantum mechanical device, and these, by the way, are important concepts for this master practitioner training, that the body is actually a quantum mechanical device, and it operates following many of the rules of quantum physics. So this is not a course in quantum physics, but I think we need to understand some stuff, or we need to discuss some things, so that we can all be talking about or working from at least the same sets of theories. So Carl Pribram in 1960 won a Nobel Prize for the following description. Actually, it began before Pribram.

In 1957, a guy named Penfield drilled a hole in a woman's brain. He was trying to cure her of epilepsy. And stuck an electrode into her brain and probed her brain with an electrode and she remembered everything of a birthday party when she was age two. And she remembered just in such detail. All the while she knew that she wasn't at the birthday party.

All the while she knew that there was a memory going on. But she remembered the memory in greater detail then, and she hadn't thought of it since she was age two, but she remembered the smell of the birthday cake, the feel of the crinoline in her dress. She could see her parents the way they were. She could see all of her little friends the way they were. And she had a complete remembrance of this.

And so in 1957, Penfield postulated, and this was the Penfield study, postulated that all of the memories that we have are stored in the brain. And then the rat doctors got busy. You know who rat doctors are, right? They're the doctors that work with rats. And they began to work with rats, and they began to cut out portions of the brain and discover if they could discover where memory was.

And I'll be brief with this, but what the rat doctors discovered was if they didn't take out the brain stem, if they took out the entire brain, the rat still had a certain amount of memory. And so in 1960, based on this, Karl Pribram postulated the holographic storage of memory in the brain, which essentially says that the memory is stored actually throughout the entire nervous system. And Dr. Paul Goodwin agrees with this. In fact, this is one of the bases of his theory. that memory is stored holographically throughout the entire nervous system.

Let me explain what a hologram is and how that would work. If you're listening on the tape, why don't you get a 3x5 card and follow along with me. If I were to take a picture of a cup, say this cup here, and you can actually see this cup. If you can see it, it's got some beads of water on it. Now, if I were to take a picture of this cup with a laser and a holographic camera, what would happen is I would develop the film and instead of seeing the cup, it's kind of hard to order holographic pictures because when you look at the negative, all it is is a bunch of squiggly lines.

And those squiggly lines are called interference patterns. But when you take a laser and shine the laser through the hologram, that's the piece of film that's been developed, when you shine that through, what you get is you get a complete picture of the cup suspended in midair, and you can look at the cup virtually in 360 degrees, all angles, and you can see every side of the cup, even the back side of the cup from where the film was, you can actually see all the way around the cup. So if you take a bunch of squiggly lines and a negative and you shine the hologram through the... I mean, you shine the laser light through the hologram, you'll see a complete picture of a cup suspended in midair. And you know what a hologram is if you saw Star Wars or if you've actually been to any Walt Disney... like Walt Disney World or Walt Disney... or Disneyland, you've seen holograms projected in midair.

And, or in Star Wars, the picture of Princess Leia that R2-D2 projected out in the first part of the first movie was a, was actually a film, holographic film, or hologramic film, where she was, where she, her entire body was suspended in midair. Now, that's not the interesting part of the hologram. I mean, it is interesting that the picture would be suspended in midair, but here's the really interesting part about the hologram. The interesting part is, if I were to take this holographic plate now, and if you're doing this along with me on the tapes, take that 3x5 card, fold it in half, and rip it in half. If I were to take and cut this holographic plate in half, what I'd be left with is half the plate, but if I shone the laser light through it, I'd still get the whole cup.

And then if I cut it in half again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and I could keep going for a while, but let's say it's about the size of a quarter or a shilling in the UK. I could still shine the laser light through it and I would still get a cup, although what would happen as the holographic plate got smaller and smaller is there would be less and less detail. I'd still have the entire cup from this. What's the theory? The theory is that the part is in the hole, and the hole is in the part.

That is, if I shine a laser light through this, even part of this plate contains the image of the hole. It contains the information of the whole like a seed. So if I walk up to this tree and I whack this coconut tree and a coconut falls down and barely misses me, and I go, whew, that was close, and I take this coconut, there's a whole coconut tree in that coconut, isn't there? But it's not manifest. Or if I take a piece of grass seed and I, from a piece of, from a, like, you know, you go out in the fields and there's like these things hanging up and you pull them, the kind of thing you stick in your mouth and walk through the field going, I'm a farmer this week.

And on the end of that is grass seed and if you whack that onto the thing, onto the thing, you'll get some seeds of, and you put that in the ground, you'll get grass. So when the whole of the grass is contained, the seed of the grass, and when the seed grows, it becomes the whole of the grass again. That's so cool. Your memory works the same way. Your memory, your memory, not just up here in your brain, but throughout your entire body, works the same way.

Because when they cut the brains out of the rats, the rats still ran the maze. That's the specifics on the experiment. But the fact is that they could cut all the brain out except the brainstem, and the rats would still have memory. Why? Why, you ask?

Do you want to know why? Why? Because you, as a human being, have an incredible number of neurological connections. You have an incredible, incredible number of neurological connections in your body. You have...

Do you know how many you have? Probably you do. You've probably heard me say this before. You have 10 to 10 to the 11th possible neurological connections in your body. That's a lot of...

That's like the number 10 with 10 zeros after it written 11 times, by the way. That's, geez, that's more than all the cars stuck on the freeway in London when there's gridlock. You know, in central London? Or even L.A. It's more than all the cars on the freeways in California, and those of you from California know what I mean.

Isn't that right? That's more than all the grains of sand on the beaches in Hawaii. Forget Hawaii. That's more than all the grains of sand on all the beaches on the planet. In fact, there's more neurons and possible neurological connections in your body than there are stars that we know of in the visible sky.

So in case you're wondering, that's a lot. And it takes all those neurological... Think about it for a minute. It must take all those neurological connections to run the hologram. So memory is based on the interference patterns.

That's, to put it nicely, the squiggly lines. Your memory is based on the squiggly lines, the interference patterns, between all of the neural networks in your body. Now, why is this important, you might ask. In fact, you might say, who cares? This is important because, and we're going to look here at wall chart number two.

This is important for the following reason. And this is what really gives me hope for the future, by the way. This is what really turns me on about the possibilities for the future for us as master practitioners in neuro-linguistic programming. And it gives me hope that if science can say this, there's hope for my mom, because one day I'll be able to tell her what I do. Do I think she'll understand?

Did you ask? Oh, she will understand. Yeah, you're very hopeful. Thank you, sir. And here's the final piece.

Let me pull all this together. Here's the final piece. I want to tell you about how those neurons in that holographic storage of memory, I want to tell you how they operate. It works kind of like this. I'm going to do the best I can to draw a neuron here, by the way.

If these are two neurons from the upper left portion coming down to the bottom right, and what happens is there's information that's transmitted through the neuron, which is transmitted by way of a sine wave, or a waveform, actually. It may not be a sine wave, but it's a wave. And this part of the information down the neuron is electric. But when we get to the end of one neuron, what happens is that there are little chemicals that are secreted from one side of the neuron. I'm going to assume that we're moving in the direction of the arrow at the bottom of the upper neuron there.

And what happens when the information gets from one neuron is that it's secreted in the gap, and this gap right here is called the synaptic gap. And when the neuron then goes across the synaptic gap, it's picked up on the other side, and then it's retransmitted through the next neuron electrically again. So our neurons are electrochemical. There's electricity through the neuron, and then there's chemical between them. The chemical part's the important part for us.

And then the pickup again, the energy coming up the other side, is electrical. The chemical part is what's really important for us. Prior to 1986, you see, well, when they first discovered neurons, they said that the neurons are only in the brain, but they missed the rest of the body. Now, Goodwin says that we have so many neurons in the brain that our brain is redundant on a scale of 10 to 1. We have so many neurons in the body that the rest of the body is redundant on a scale of 3 to 1.

So we've got a lot of neurons in there. In fact, Goodwin says if they dipped your body in a vat, which would get rid of all of everything but neurons, if they had some kind of chemical in there, it could get rid of everything but neurons. When they pulled your body back out, it was just the neurons, it would still be recognizable as to who you were. I mean, you'd look at me and you'd go, oh, there's Tad. Neurons are the densest element in your body.

Neurons are the absolutely densest element in your body. I mean, 10 to 10 to the 11th neurological connections, that's a lot of neurons. Can we talk? There's like, that's it, man. There's tons of neurons here.

So originally they thought that this stuff right here, neurotransmitter, originally they thought that the neurotransmitter was only in the brain. Then they realized that, hey, it must be in the rest of the body. But originally they thought it was only between the nerve cells. But then eventually they realized the nerve cells were so dense that it really was everywhere. And what Chopra's work has pointed out, and it was unnoticed in 68 when it happened, but I'll bet you that when we look back on this 100 years from now, I will bet you that this is a major, important turning point for neuro-linguistic programming, for hypnosis, and any other science of mine, including all of the therapeutic techniques on the planet.

Now that I can just lump them all together and go big scale. I'll bet you that this is a major turning point, because what quantum physics has discovered is that neurotransmitter bathes every single cell in the human body. Wait a minute, stop the press, rip out the headlines. That's important news. Slap that headline in right now.

Neurotransmitter bathes every single cell in the human body, which means that at any given moment, your mind can and does communicate with every single cell in your body. Your mind can and does communicate regularly with every single cell in your body. think about it for a minute. There's not a thought that you have that isn't transmitted from moment to moment to every single cell in your body. So every moment when you're happy, all your cells in your body are happy. And every moment when you're sad, all the cells in your body are sad.

And every moment when you're grumpy, all the cells in your body are grumpy, or at least not all of them, but a lot of them could be. This is big news. Because one of the other things my mom always said was, oh, that NLP stuff. She said when she got any kind of an inkling of what it was, which was a mental science, she said, oh, that's just in your mind. Oh, I say you've heard that.

Have you heard that? How come you're going to Hawaii to take a training for that? That's just stuff that's just in your mind. Or how come you do hypnosis? That's all mind stuff, isn't it?

Well, the next time somebody says to you, well, it's all in your mind, you can say thank you. Because what quantum physics and quantum biology has just done is they've proven the mind-body connection. They took the mind-body connection, they go, yup, done, that's it, got it. Up until this moment, we could not say that the mind-body connection existed with any certainty. Today, quantum biology and quantum physics says every single cell in your body is bathed in neurotransmitter.

Every single thought you have is communicated to every single cell at every moment of the day. And what's the mind-body connection? If this is the case, what is the mind-body connection? This is the case. Yeah, well, neurotransmitter.

But what is it that allows us to access this neurotransmitter? What is it that's going to allow us to get in there and really begin to access our connection to neurotransmitter? This is the end of Tape 1, Side B.