# Parts Integration

All right, welcome back. How did that exercise go? Yeah? Did you notice that it was relatively easy to get to the same level of agreement? Yeah?

You noticed that? Did you notice that it was relatively easy to separate intention from behavior with a conditional close? Yes? But did you notice that it took a little more, did you notice it took actually quite a bit more skill to chunk down as quickly as you can, all the while maintaining agreement? Let me give you just one final piece to that, and then we'll move on.

The one final piece to that is, quite honestly, if you get to a point where you chunk down and the two people say no, they don't want to do it, then what you do is you go back to number two, to the conditional close again, and you go back to their highest level intention. So if at number three you don't actually, if you're not actually totally successful at getting them to do that while maintaining agreement, then simply go back up to the specific word you were using before and go back to the conditional close and then chunk back down again. Yeah? You could take it on a lateral chunk, yes. Question is, if you're doing that because you're taking it on a lateral chunk, yes, you could.

Since you're a master of chunking, and you are, are you not, you're going to know exactly how to do that. All right. Any other questions? Excellent. All right.

We're going to move on to talk about parts, and I want to give you some additional theory which will, I think, assist your understanding of how prime concerns and how quantum linguistics work. Prime concerns is the first time I've ever mentioned prime concerns. It's just an application of quantum linguistics, but we're moving toward that sort of directionally. So let's talk about parts and let's go to page 330. I'm also on slide number 49.

What are parts? When I first took my master practitioner training, in fact, I asked the trainer, I said, what is a part? And the trainer went, shut up. It's like there was no really good answer for me, like what was a part in an LP. So hopefully this will answer the question.

Let's talk a little bit about what is a part and how they might work. And by the way, this theoretical discussion will go actually across the board and allow us to look at a number of different angles with regards to parts. And also, this applies to every set of boundaries in the nervous system at the unconscious or conscious level. So when we're talking about parts, we could also be talking about anything else we've worked with so far. It'll become clear in a moment.

Page 330. So parts, number one, parts are part of the unconscious mind, and they have generally a purpose or an intention, that's their highest level, and a lower level function or behavior. So each part will have a function or something that they do, a behavior, and each part will have a purpose or an intention. Parts are functionally detached from the rest of the nervous system. That is to say, they're essentially non-integrated with the rest of the nervous system.

The way parts actually work is demonstrated on slide number 53. So if you look at slide number 53, this is an example of the nervous system which is without parts. Except for the part that says parts. But imagine that's not there. And what happens is that a significant emotional experience usually occurs.

Something happens and a part actually is born. And that's on slide 54. So now we have a nervous system without boundaries, and what happens next is then we have a nervous system which has some boundaries to it, or added to it. And according to Dr. Paul Goodwin, trapped negative emotions can interfere in the body, can interfere with the flow of information through the neural network pathways.

So a part or actually any kind of boundary conditions in the neural nets will actually interfere with the flow of information. So, for example, if on slide number 55, if there was a piece of information that was supposed to flow from the, let's say, from the lower left through this part upward toward the upper right, and this piece of communication was supposed to then flow smoothly through, but if there was a part there, through the activated set of neural networks, if there was a part there, the information might sort of go off awry or might not get to the place it was supposed to go. So the parts themselves tend to be functionally, functionally means software, detached from the rest of the nervous system. Page 330, they often represent, we could say, minor personalities or even significant others who we've modeled or who have been imprinted upon us. Usually they have their own set of values and belief systems, and some of them think they're in charge of the maintenance of the system.

Parts are generally born from significant emotional experiences, just like in timeline therapy, any kind of gestalt might be. And they're usually to protect a non-integrated behavior. So a lot of times a part will protect and or continue, actually, a non-integrated behavior that a person produces. Parts can be a source of incongruency in the individual. And oftentimes, in fact, I haven't found one yet that wasn't.

They themselves can be or are incongruent. And the incongruency usually lies in the difference between the purpose-slash-intention and the function-slash-behavior. Here's the thing. Think about it for a minute. A part which represents a part of the nervous system cannot possibly have the purpose or intention of the whole in mind.

Right? It couldn't, because if it did, it wouldn't be a part. Okay? So epistemologically, that is to say, in terms of thinking about thinking, a part cannot possibly have the function or purpose of the whole in mind, because if it did, it would be the whole. So all we have to do is chunk the part up outside of its boundaries.

So the difference usually lies in the incongruency, number 10, between the purpose slash intention and the function slash behavior. Oftentimes, actually every time I worked with a client, we found that a part usually has its opposite number, an alter ego, flip side of the coin, another part with which this part's most in conflict with. And these parts will usually have the same highest purpose slash intention. Usually we'll find that they were once part of a larger whole. And by the way, that's the way we would actually do reintegration.

Let's look at page 331 at the bottom of our chart here. This chart starts at the bottom. If we have, we begin with the notion of wholeness. And my point of view is that we're born whole, W-H-O-L-E, and that life as it happens to us causes functional blockages to occur, and there are certain thresholds. Those horizontal lines on your chart, there are certain thresholds.

So at some level, with no experience, we're whole, and then at some level, we can get gestalt, a limiting decision, there can be a negative state. Also, on the positive side, values, beliefs, and strategies are installed in the same way. Then there's another threshold, and we probably get a part a little more intense than that. It might be a compulsion. Somewhere in there would be a phobia.

And at some point, when the part doesn't have any communication across the boundaries, we get a multiple personality. So my point of view is it's the same mechanics that create parts that creates multiple personalities, and what the difference is is along the left-hand side of your diagram. So let's look at what those three things are. What affects the boundaries is, first of all, the number of times the event has happened. So whether the boundaries are really high and the information doesn't go through or whether the boundaries are rather loose and pliable and the information does go through depends on three things and they happen in the fourth.

So the first is the number of times the event has happened. The second thing is the rate of change of the state. So if you can imagine a hill with a very gently sloping hill, that you'd be walking up this gently sloping hill, that's a slow rate of change of the state. And can you imagine walking up a hill that's like very, almost vertical in terms of how quickly you have to go up the hill. That's a rate of change of state that goes very quickly.

Okay, so that's what I mean by the rate of change of the state. Some rates of change of state are too intense for the person to be able to traverse the boundaries easily. So a part is formed. The third thing is the intensity of the state. So think of a big hill, walking up a big hill versus walking up a little hill.

That's the intensity of the state. That's the peak. That's how big it is. So the three things are the number of times, how many times this has happened, the rate of change, Is it a gentle slope up the hill, or is it a tough walk up a very mountainous sort of hill? And then, how high is the peak?

And all of these happen, slide 58, all of these happen in a nervous system which is more or less flexible. So the nervous system has more or less flexibility as this particular state occurs in the individual. Okay? So that's what affects the boundaries. That's exactly what's going to affect the boundary conditions of the part as the boundary conditions are set up.

Okay? So my point of view is that whether we're talking about, and I'm back to slide 56, my point of view is whether we're talking about strategies or beliefs or limiting decisions or negative states or parts or compulsions or phobias or multiple personalities, the mechanics in the nervous system are exactly the same. It's just a matter of intensity versus the peak versus the number of times. So that's why when we talked about going back and forth over the boundaries, remember we said this is a part, what is the not part? We said this is a chair, what is a not chair?

As we were going back and forth over the boundaries last night when you're doing these exercises in quantum linguistics, the process was exactly the same. It's going back and forth over the boundaries. Now, what does a parts integration do? What does our standard parts integration do in NLP? Let's look at page 332.

Parts integration actually makes the person whole. That's what a parts integration does. So let's look, let's look and see here on page 332 exactly what we're going to be doing in our standard parts integration, also called visual squash. Okay, so the first thing to do is identify the conflict and the parts involved. How many people, by the way, have not seen this particular script for this part?

So this is the same as we did in the accelerated practitioner training, if you took your accelerated practitioner training with us. How many people have not seen this script? Great, okay. All right, so the first thing to do is to identify the conflict and the parts involved. The second thing we're going to do is we're going to have the part which represents the unwanted state or behavior to come out on the hand first.

I'm going to demonstrate this in just a moment. Third thing we're going to do is have the opposite number or the flip side of the coin to come out on the other hand. So we've got then two hands. Third thing is to make sure that the client has a visual auditory kinesthetic, a VAK image of each part, and we actually ask the client to personify the part as best we can. Okay?

We ask the client to personify each part, and what I say to the client usually is, does that part look like anyone you know? Does it sound like anyone you know? As it sits in your hand, does it feel like anyone you know? Then we're going to separate intention from behavior. So we're going to reframe each part so they realize they actually have the same intention by checking up.

We're going to ask, what is the intention or for what purpose? So we get each of the parts to the same place. And then we want to know what resources or attributes each part has that the other part would like to have. And then we have the parts notice they were once part of a larger whole. At that point, we can also ask for any other parts that were once part of the larger whole to join in the integration.

Now let's think about this for just a minute. Let's go back to step number three. If we have parts which are neurologically very close together, in terms of the range of part and not part, if these parts are neurologically very close together, like let's say a part with which you're in conflict or a part with which you're not in conflict. Let me draw it out. Wall chart number 10.

If this is the continuum, this horizontal line is a continuum from zero to infinity, if we take two parts that are very close in that continuum, which would be marked X and X, then the integration will be that much. If, on the other hand, we take two parts which would be marked Y and Y, notice how much more integration we'll get if we get Y and Y. So we're asking for the part that's the flip side of the coin, the alternate number, the opposite number of the part that's out on the hand first. So we go for that opposite number to see if we can get the complete neurological integration to occur. And what that'll do is it'll give the client a far more profound experience of that integration occurring.

The client will have a very, very profound integration of that experience occurring if the parts are widely divergent, if the parts are way divergent in terms of their neurological separateness. Okay, then we do a VAK image of each part because we want to personify it or really hook the client into or have the client really light up the neural networks. We want those neural networks really lit up when we do this. Then we're going to separate intention from behavior. And at some point, by the way, when we get the part to the same word, the hands will start coming together automatically.

If you do the parts integration really, really, really, really well, the hands will start coming together automatically. Some of you have already experienced that. You may have seen me do that before. I'm going to do a demonstration here before we actually do the exercise, so you'll get a chance to see it. But what we're looking for is if the parts are like, for example, we've got them VAK image, and once we have both of those parts really there, if when we get to the same word, if the hands start coming together, you don't have to go down this whole list.

Just tell the client, allow the hands to continue to come together. But if the hands do not come together, we've got step number six. So if the hands don't come together, we're going to create a third part with the combined resources of each part. We're going to place the third image between the other two images. We're going to create a series of visual images representing the metamorphosis or transition from each part to the central image.

Step number seven, we're going to then bring the hands together. If the hands start coming together at step number five, you'll jump down to step number seven. We're going to bring the hands together and at the same time have the individual images begin to merge. Then step number eight, we're going to take the integrated part inside. And step number nine is optional.

And it's in relationship, if you've done this in relationship to timeline therapy, that is, if in the middle of releasing a negative emotion you came to do a parts integration, then you would do step number 9 and 11. If you didn't, you wouldn't. Oftentimes you'll have to do a parts integration before the negative emotion will fully release. So if you came out of timeline therapy to this point, you'll use step number 9. For this exercise, we probably won't be coming out of timeline therapy.

In fact, I'm sure of it. Step number 10 is to test in future pace. And then step number 11, if you came out of timeline therapy and did step number nine, then you'll take the new super part in the timeline and you'll release any event or any decision from the past relative to the presenting problem. Okay? So that's what we're going to do and I'd like to demonstrate this right now.

Okay, so I want to do a demonstration but first I want to give you some more information because we want to add on to the parts integration that you learned, this parts integration that we just went through. I want to add on to that and go through some additional information about parts integration so that when I do the demonstration, I can also do some linguistic stuff with the integration of the parts. Let's do some additional considerations first. This is on slide number 59, but it's not in your notes. Just a couple of things with regards to information being transmitted through neural networks.

The frequency of the wave of the energy determines the meaning of the sensation. That's a notion from quantum physics and from quantum biology, that the frequency of the waveform through the neuron, the frequency of the waveform, the frequency of the wave, in other words, like a radio station, the low frequency versus the higher frequency, the frequency determines the meaning of the sensation. So essentially a sensation in your body is just frequency. We'll see how this all integrates here in just a minute. Number two, the information can flow in multiple directions and dimensions.

This is also information that's important in the creation of a part. And the third thing is that we can actually make a mountain out of a molehill, which is to say that a somewhat minor event can often get blown up into a major event, and even that can become a part. So all of these things determine whether a part will be a part, or even if it goes more intensely, whether it will be a multiple personality, or if it goes less intensely, whether it will be simply a negative emotion or a limiting decision. So these are three additional, I would say probably not major considerations like the other ones that we talked about. But nevertheless, they are considerations.

It is possible that To integrate parts linguistically without actually doing a parts integration. So we're going to see what happens, and I'd like to demonstrate perhaps both, or one, or we'll see where we get to. It is possible to integrate parts linguistically. And so we'll go back to the notion that a part has a purpose. We're looking at slide number 65 now.

That a part has a purpose and a behavior. So each part you work with will have a purpose or an intention and some behavior that it's producing. And if you swap the behavior, you actually can integrate the parts sometimes, but not always. And it depends on how intense their boundaries are. But there is a linguistic parts integration handout that you have in your linguistics section.

So we've got to go back from section 3 back to section 2 now. And it's on page 247, section 2, page 47. It is possible to integrate parts or resolve a parts conflict linguistically only, and here's how you do it. The first thing is you discover the function or behavior for each part, and you want to know what's the behavior of the part or what is the function the part plays. And the second thing you want to do is discover the purpose or intention of the behavior.

So what is the purpose of this behavior? What's the intent of the behavior? You want to make sure the learnings are present. The third thing is you want to make sure that the learnings are present. So you can ask, what is there to learn from this behavior?

You want to handle the ecology, the integration. And then you're simply going to switch the purpose or intention from one part to the other. You'll simply switch the purpose or intention from one part to the other and notice if it integrates. Now, notice the difference between this process and notice what happens when we do it. So I, now I, now I'd like to have a volunteer and I, and we'll see what we demonstrate.

Because now that I can get to play with the linguistics, we'll see exactly what we're demonstrating, whether we're demonstrating a standard parts integration or whether we're demonstrating a linguistic parts integration. So what's the conflict? Yeah. So you seem to be doing things which injure you. and what? You seem to be doing things which injure yourself, and you think there's some self-punishment there, but how does that relate to a part?

So you feel there's a part of you that does it. Okay, good. Come on up. Give her a hand. All right, so let's see.

Yvonne, you have a part of you that you feel is what? Can you tell me what's going on? Well, it seems that if I go to do something that I get enjoyment out of, I either injure myself so that I can't participate properly or I get sick afterwards as if it was a sort of punishment for injuring myself. Really? Yeah.

Okay. And you think there's a part of you that's causing this or what? What do you think? Yeah, because I always say there's a part of me that thinks I need punishing. Really?

That's great. I wonder if I could talk to that part. Yeah. Could I? Yeah.

I wonder which hand that part would like to come out and stand on. Would it like to come out and stand on the right hand? Oh, it would. Okay. Let's see.

Would that part like to come out and stand here or here? I don't know. Right there. Okay, great. Now, as that part is there, does that part look like anyone you know?

My mother. Looks like your mother. Whoa. Okay. Does it sound like your mother?

Yes. It does. Okay. And, of course, that part has a certain weight or feels a certain way, right? Yes.

Now I wonder if there's a part with which that part is most in conflict. The flip side of the coin, the alter ego, if you will. There is another part. I wonder if that part would like to come out and stand on the other hand, would it? If it would come and stand, would it like to stand here?

Yes. Right there. Okay, great. So what does that part look like? Me.

Looks like you. A younger me. A younger you. Okay. Now what's this part's intention for this behavior?

To stop me from doing things. To stop you from doing things. And, let's see, what's this part's intention? To enjoy things. Okay, now let's just see.

This part here. What's this part's highest intention for stopping you from doing things? To stop me getting hurt. To stop you getting hurt. Well, that's interesting.

Because I wonder if that part realizes that it... Because the part is the part that's creating the behavior of getting hurt. So the purpose... Oh, wait, I don't understand this. The purpose is to stop you from getting hurt, so it's creating you getting hurt.

Emotional hurt. I wonder if... Well, I don't get it. So the part's to stop you from getting hurt, so it's hurting you, right? Wow.

Does it get that it's behavior and it's conflict, behavior and it's intention are in the, should we say in conflict? Does it notice that there's a conflict there? No. It doesn't. Okay.

So does it figure then that it needs to... I don't understand. Like, for example, if it was going to stop you from being hurt, what would be the purpose in that? Stop rejection. For what purpose?

Stop emotional pain. For what purpose? Stop feeling hurt. For what purpose? Now, notice that we're getting right up at the limits of the boundaries here.

Are you with me? Yeah. Okay. So what would be the purpose in that? To be happy.

To be happy. Whoa. Cool. Now, what's this part's purpose over here? To have fun.

For what purpose? Enjoyment. To be happy. That's interesting, isn't it? These parts, did they notice they have the same highest intention?

I mean, could they think that they had the same highest intention? I don't know. That's sort of a surprise to them, isn't it, when they think about it? Isn't it? In fact, could they notice, were they once part of a larger whole?

They were, weren't they? Were there any other parts that were once part of that larger whole? They were. I wonder, as these two parts look at each other, could you have them sort of look at each other and notice what's the positive attributes that each part has that the other would like to have? There's quite a good integration going on there, isn't there?

Yep. Because I think your hands are shaking. I think so, too. You think so, too? In fact, I don't know if you noticed this, but they've moved just a little bit closer.

Did you notice that? You did. Huh. They're not going to continue to move. But the other parts here, if the other parts, if they wanted to come and join in, perhaps they could notice how they'd want to best integrate at the unconscious level.

So there's this part here. This part here has attributes that this part would like to have, right? It does, does it not? And this part here has attributes that this part would like to have. Some.

Yeah, certainly not all of them. And this part here has attributes that this part has. Each of the parts has attributes the other part would like to have, doesn't it? They feel heavy. They feel heavy, yeah.

But notice that they are moving together, aren't they? I wonder if you'd just like to allow them to continue to go ahead and do that as the two parts just sort of come together. And whatever other parts were once part of that larger whole. And what I'm going to suggest is that as they come together, you allow all of whatever neural networks were not whole and complete together, that you just simply allow them to just sort of open up and be totally integrated. That's good, because there's a lot of energy right there, isn't there?

That's really good. Because these parts have been apart for a long time. But now they really want to come together, don't they? They do, don't they? Yeah, that's really magnificent.

So just allow that to continue. That's right. And don't allow them to touch until they're absolutely ready to integrate. Totally and completely at the unconscious level. Right now.

That's right. Now what Yvonne is noticing is a tremendous amount of energy being released from this process. Are you noticing that? Yeah. Okay, just checking.

That's good, Yvonne. Just allow that integrated part now to just sort of come inside. So just take that part right inside and just allow it to go right inside and become totally one and totally integrated with all the rest of your unconscious mind at the unconscious level. Just allow it to totally integrate the unconscious level. That's good, Yvonne.

That's good. You're hot. That's what I would have said. Those are power surges. No, but think about it for a minute.

Our theory of parts that we just talked about. There's a trapped energy in the part that is part of the neurological constraints. And what we do is we, on wall chart number 10, we go for the widest possible separation, which means we're going to get the opposite number. So like, in terms of a battery, what has the most charge? A little negative or a whole lot negative all the way over from positive?

Well, obviously a whole lot negative all the way over from positive. So what Yvonne has done is she's taken two opposite charges electrically. That's what I mentioned earlier about the electrical charge, that the information transferred through the neurons is electrical. When we've got trapped information in there, it feels to me like there's trapped energy. Now, that may not be a really solid description in terms of science, but it feels to me like there's trapped energy in there.

And when we integrate two parts that are so widely neurologically divergent, all of that trapped energy gets freed up, and the client feels it in their body. My migraine's gone. Your migraine's gone. I had it for two days. You had a migraine for two days and now it's gone.

Excellent. Excellent. Yvonne, that's something you... It's like me. I'm very forgetful.

I used to worry about my memory and then I forgot to. It's like with the, whatever that thing was, you can just let it go now. Because whatever was, part of that isn't anymore. It's all integrated. So as you think about your future, you can be, you can certainly have your head be comfortable, right?

Yep. Good. Welcome back. Thank you. How was that?

Good. You exhausted me. Give her a hand. Thank you. So that was a demonstration of our standard parts integration.

Pretty straightforward based on the script on page 332. Any questions about that? No? Absolutely standard parts integration. Okay, so let's do this as an exercise.

Let's do the standard parts integration as an exercise. Okay, so why don't you get together groups of three people, a master practitioner, client, and observer. Master practitioner, get together, do parts integration with the other person following the outline on page 332. If you're listening to the tapes, please stop the tapes and do the exercise now. Go ahead and stop the tapes now.

This is the end of tape 7, side A. All right, welcome back. How did that last exercise go? Good. Good.

Okay, now that we've done that, let's look at the process of how would you do this whole thing now linguistically. I wanted to have you see the linguistic part of it first so that you'd have the opportunity to see that. There's a number of different ways we can do that. One is the linguistic parts integration that we just went through on page 247. And another way is, and I'm not sure, I never know which way is going to work best or which way is going to, which is what's going to happen when I do, when I work with a client on this.

So we'll just sort of see what happens. There's another way that it's possible to do it. The other way to integrate a part is to apply the behavior against the intention and use a non-mirror image reverse inductive language pattern. So I'm not sure which will happen. We'll have to see.

Who has a part of them that they'd like to... You raised your hand before. Can you tell me what the presenting problem is? Part of you resists the back-of-the-room sales that I need to do. Part of you resists the back-of-the-room sales that I need to do.

Part of you resists the back of the room sales that you need to do. Come on up. Give him a hand. That's something we definitely want to clear out. Is this the trance chair?

Oh, wait, wait. This is the integrative chair. Yeah, we're talking about quantum linguistics here. This is the integrative chair. Okay. yeah we're talking about uh you know quantum yeah no we're talking about quantum linguistics here this is the integrative chair okay this is the chair where all is integrated all is well all is well okay joe so let me just see part of you integrate part of you what i want to tell me about this again part of me resists the uh the back of the room product sales that I need to do in my seminars.

Okay. And what's the purpose in that? The purpose of it is that I'm not paying enough per seminar to even come close to making a living, and I need to about sell enough to have commissions from that, and the part resists that. What's the part's purpose in resisting that? I mean, like, why would the part, I mean, what would be the part's purpose or intention in resisting, you know, having you do back-of-the-room selling?

That part of me says that we don't sell. Selling is bad. It's, in fact, it's a part that has been with me. I've found myself in selling positions most of my career. Whoa.

But I have that part that says, no, no, that's not something the Craigs do. Oh, really? That's right. That's right, yeah. So that's not something the Craigs do.

And that part, resist sales, because that's not something you do? That's right. What's the purpose in doing that? Help me out with this one. What's the purpose in resisting the sale?

Because that's not something you do. What's the purpose? I'm getting the word honor. Honor. The honor of the family.

Family's honor. So let me just ask you a question. May I? Yes. I'd actually like to ask that part, if I may, the question.

The part? And I wonder if this part would consider, in all the things that the Craigs do, if you could consider one thing, anything that you do, and whatever you do, but specifically one thing, how much honor is there in not making enough money so that you could make as much as you want? Right, none. Joe is going through myriad color changes. There's a fair amount of smoke coming out of his ears and he's gasping.

But no breath is coming out of him. He's gasping for not breath. Now he's gasping for breath. Okay, now he's got his breath back. Did I breathe?

Yes, I think you did. I do too. Joe, what was the problem? It'll come. Okay.

No, it won't, actually. Something about my... It was a problem, wasn't it? Let me just ask you a question. When you go out into the future and you think about actually going to a seminar, one of yours, and you're actually noticing if it's okay for you to sell products in the back of the room and make as much considering stuff which is unconsiderable, inconsiderable, unthinkable.

And he's thinking it for the first time because we're asking him, using quantum linguistics, parts integration now, to have him think about it in a different way. He's thinking about it in a whole different way from what he thought about it. So we've actually run back and forth across the boundaries. So I want you to go out in the future and notice if you're selling with honor. Yeah.

Well, that's the only way to do it. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's right. And that is how you do it, isn't it?

Yeah. Yeah. Yes. With honor. You wanted to change, haven't you?

Right. So let me just ask you, and I'm not going to make any suggestions about this. Good. Okay. I wouldn't want you to.

We both said that nodding our heads, by the way. Yes. So I want you to go out in the future to another time in the future when you'd be called upon to sell a product in the back of the room and notice if you can do that now comfortably and feel good about it. Honestly. Honestly.

I can. And honorably? Yes, yes, yes. The only things I will sell, and I will sell things, I'll only sell the things that I feel honorable about. Good, good, good.

That's good. Yeah, that's, you know, that's good. I've got to be integrated with that. Oh, yeah, absolutely. Now I'm with you on that one, totally.

Okay. All right, let me just ask you one final question. There was a part of you that, can I talk to that part? Sure, sure. Is the part there or has it disappeared?

I'd like to know. I'm just doing one final test just for demonstration purposes. Normally I would not ask the client to talk to the part again unless I was unsure whether or not it had totally integrated. But I'm going to ask Joe just so you all can see where Joe's at with the part. No, I don't.

I really don't. I don't feel it. Before, it was just, you know, right there. But I don't know. I don't feel it.

Cool. Cool. So when you go out and make as much money as you deserve, honorably, call me. I will. I want to hear about your success.

Okay. Give him a hand. Thanks, Jeff. Good job. Okay, so here's the deal.

The tip-off when you actually do this is the client going... What? Did you notice that? Okay, Murray. Want to play?

Come on up. Give him a hand. We don't know what's up with Murray, but he raised his hand earlier. Or at least part of him did. And we want to see what's up.

What's up? What's the plan? A part of me feels like I never seem to know enough to use all this stuff. It's like, and this is kind of cross-contextual. I have to bite my tongue, you know.

Do you already have the intervention yet? Okay, so part of you feels like you don't know enough to use this. Right. It's like I read mass quantities of books and listen to thousands of hours of tape. You know what I love about this?

I just don't feel like I know enough. No one else in the audience has that problem. No one else listening to the tapes has that problem. Well, that makes me concerned because, see, I had this idea about going on to do the trainer stuff, and I go, well, how am I ever going to do this if I don't feel like I know enough? Exactly.

You know what I mean? I do. Thanks for bringing that up. I appreciate you checking the mail. So, Murray, let me just ask you a question.

The part that says you don't know enough. Right. How does it know that? That's a good question. In fact, I wonder if that part could think of all the things it doesn't know.

Right now. And... That it doesn't know? Let me just ask that part. May I ask that part a question?

Yeah. What's its purpose in having you think you don't know enough? Well, I wouldn't want to use this information unwisely or without integrity, and I wouldn't want to make mistakes. Well, let me just say a couple things here. One is, does integrity have anything to do with how much you know?

Not necessarily. Okay. And unwisely, of course. I mean, that has something to do with how much you know. Or does it?

I mean, well, not specifically necessarily about a quantity of what I know, but how you use it. Yeah. So it's not really how much you know, is it? It's what you do with what you know, I guess. Right.

So let me just mention one thing, if I may, with regard, if I could talk to this part. Okay. Okay. This part is actually, because let me see if I can get really clear about what it's doing here. This part itself is, wants you to know more.

Yes. But it's telling you you don't know enough. Right. That's right. So when will you ever know enough to know that?

You know enough. I don't know. I don't know enough to know that. I'm going to describe here. Murphy is beet red.

Beet red. Smoke's coming out of his ears. He's sweating. You're sweating. I mean, we are in Hawaii, but it's sort of an overcast day.

Do you know enough? About what? Yeah, um... Hi. Hi, how are you?

Fried. Welcome back. Where have I been? Kona? I've been here for three days.

Your planet is nice. Thank you, thank you. Okay. Welcome back. Yeah, thanks.

Do you know enough? I hope so. Yeah. When you go out in the future. Yeah.

I don't mean to the near future, but maybe a week from now, two weeks from now. Okay. When you're finished this training, or even perhaps when you've completed the trainer's training. Okay. You know what I mean?

Yeah. You'll be there, won't you? I will be there. Yes, I will be. Do you know enough?

I mean, to teach. I'm not suggesting you know everything, because, of course, you don't know everything. I'd like to. Consciously. And you still have a desire to learn.

But is it enough for you to begin to use the material? I guess, yeah. You guess. Let's go back to two weeks from now when you think about that. Two weeks from now?

Okay. You've completed the Master Practitioner training and all the stuff you've already learned in Practitioner, is that enough for you to begin using the material? Comfortably. Yeah, I guess so. I guess so.

But you're not sure. See, I'm a real bug on testing. Testing's very important when you do actually anything. And I'm really solid on testing. I don't get that we're totally congruent yet, and I'm going to push for congruency.

So this is a really good example, because some of the other folks have been real congruent. I'm not sure Murray's done, so we're going to test. So let's test. So when you think of using the material, how do you feel about it? Let's say right now, the stuff you've already learned right up to this point.

Do you feel you can use it? Is it possible for you to use it? And can you use it comfortably? Well, up to a point, but I don't feel that good about my skill level, of course. So you need more practice?

Oh, yeah. Let me ask you this, because the presenting problem was you felt like you didn't know enough. Do you know enough? Well, I'm going to have to learn it as I go, really. Or do you know enough right now to do the practitioner level stuff?

Yeah, I guess. To some degree. So this is good. So what is it that prevents you from using the practitioner level stuff easily? Not wanting to be wrong or make mistakes.

Excellent. That's good. So would you say that you're concerned about making mistakes, or would you say that, I mean, if I want to check some ecology here, are you perhaps overly concerned about making mistakes? Probably so. Yeah, because if you pay attention to ecology, will you make mistakes?

I mean, or even if you do, can you correct them if you pay attention to the ecology? Well, yeah, because the only way you can learn is you've got to do it. Right, okay. I just don't like that idea, I guess. You don't like the idea of doing it?

Well, no. By the way, I want to be the Buddha. Oh, you just want to sit there and be. All right. Okay, Murray, so think about this for just a minute.

Is there, so let me talk to the part of we originally were working with. Okay. Can I talk to that part? Sure. Okay.

What's that part's highest intention or highest purpose at this point? Learning, but not making mistakes at it or something like that. I got it. Okay. Well, it's okay.

Maybe it's actually, it's like it's trying to achieve perfection or something like that. It's trying to achieve some sort of total perfection. Got it. Instantly or something like that. Great.

So that part, this is great. So now we've gotten to the highest intention. So that part thinks that you have to be perfect to do anything. Do anything. So in the meanwhile, you're not doing anything until you're perfect.

Is that right? Let me just mention something. Anything less than total freedom to use this is not perfection. Anything less than total freedom to use this is not perfection. I wonder if that part could consider that anything less than total freedom to use this material freely is not perfection.

Wow. What does that part think about that? Seems like it makes sense. Makes sense, yeah. And when that part, as you think about it, does that ring true for you?

Almost. Almost. Okay. All right. So let me talk to that part, if I may.

Okay. Okay? And I wonder if that part could come out and stand on which hand would it like? This hand. Okay.

And this is the part that's not allowing you to use an LP. Right. Okay. What you learned. until you know it? Perfectly.

Perfectly. There's a part, I'm sure, with which this part's most in conflict because we wouldn't have talked otherwise, right? I mean, you wouldn't have raised your hand. So is there another part that that part's most in conflict? Yeah.

Okay. Would that part like to come out and stand on the other end? What part is this part here? It's kind of a fun part. Learning is fun or something else like that, but it's a happy part.

This part here in your right hand? Yeah. This part's more serious. Does this look like someone you know? Well, yeah, it's sort of a geeky me.

This part over here, does this look like someone you know? Well, this is the academic version over here, sort of. Okay. And this part over here, does this look like someone you know? Well, yeah, that's the little kid in me.

That's the fun learning part. Oh, cool. And this part's sort of like William F. Buckley or something. Okay.

So this part has a highest intention. It's what? Learning, but it wants me to be perfect. For what purpose? Yeah.

That's a good question. We're asking Murray to dunk up outside of the boundaries of the part. So we still, even though we got all the way to perfection, still we're not outside the boundaries of the part yet. So we're still asking him to go now outside of the boundaries of the part, or outside of the constraints of the thinking of the part. So we're asking him to contemplate something that is uncontemplatable for the part at this point.

So what's the purpose? For what purpose? What's it going to get you? Well, if I'm perfect, then I won't make mistakes. I won't do anything wrong.

I'd like to point out that that's actually a downward chunk. Okay. So perfection for what purpose? Well, to feel good about using all this stuff. To feel good.

And what does that give you? Well, I'll be happy about it all. Happy about it? Yeah, I'll not suggesting this, but your hands are actually moving together. By the way, Murray just turned red again.

Beat red. He's starting to sweat. His hands are moving together. Murray, before those hands totally come together, there are other parts that were once part of a larger whole that integrated these two parts together. Is that correct?

Were there? What? Just allow those to integrate, too, at the end. Before your hands come together, make sure the integration is totally and completely complete as they come together. Just allow them to continue to come together.

And integrate right now. That's good. And just... Nice color shift. Murray brings the part inside automatically.

Breeds it in. So even though we got a nice shift with the linguistic parts integration, I wasn't willing to stop there because I didn't get congruency. I'm going to test again for congruency now. Welcome back. So two planets in one day.

I'm going to hit you with this piece of trivia. The movie The Day the Earth Stood Still. Klaatu Barada Nikto. Oh, you know it! I love it!

Klaatu Barada Nikto. That's it. Okay, you win the prize. That was the secret word of the day. Oh, thank you.

You're welcome. The prize was parts integration. By the way, changing the subject, let's go back and see where you're at. How do you feel about using this material? Pretty good.

Okay, good. Is that something you can do? Yeah. Okay, good. Now that's no longer, I guess so.

Give him a hand. Thank you, Murray. Good job. Excellent, excellent. Murray got two parts integration for the price of one.

Okay, so let's unpack that. Like, what happened there? One of the things I want to point, so we'll go back and look at the whole thing. We did a linguistic parts integration. We did not, we got some, we got a nice color shift.

I mean, something integrated, but the presenting problem didn't disappear. So when you do quantum linguistics, if the presenting problem doesn't disappear, hey, you're not done. I mean, you could see a nice color shift. Client could go into the void, come back, and go, wow, I'm transformed. But if you, like for me, I'm looking at the presenting problem.

Presenting problem's still there. So I want the client to go and, you know, and let's get to, when we test in future pace, we've got to have congruency. So when Murray got to happy, when Murray got to both parts happy, did you notice that I was actually pointing to each of the hands and I went like this, right? Which is instructions at the, I actually took my right finger and pointed to his left hand and his left finger to his right hand and then moved them across quickly, indicating that the hands should come together. And the hands began to come together even more quickly at that point.

So I was using nonverbal suggestion in the process of doing parts integration. And I think you should use, if you have the parts out on a hand, you should do nonverbal suggestion when you do parts integration. So he got to both parts where the highest intention was happy, we got those together, and then we actually got the integration in that way. Are there any questions about anything that went on here with Murray? No.

Okay, good. Okay then, just one more thing before we finish the entire notion of language and parts. And that's page 248. I'd like to point out one more thing. I think we've had a tour de force of parts today, and I'm really pleased with where we got to.

There's a lot of things that you can do with parts. And we're looking at page 248 and slide number 68. And there's a number of things that you can do with parts. And the final thing is I'd like to point out that in some cases, you may find the parts organized hierarchically. So that would mean that with some clients, there could be, with any given part, a part which was in charge of that part, with any given part, a part in charge of that part, a part in charge of that part, and a part in charge of that part.

Easy for him to say. Part of me thinks that. And it's possible that there could be a whole hierarchy of parts. That's another way to think of parts and one other possibility. And then there's this...

And so let's just see if... Would somebody like to look at doing this real quickly? And I'll have you come up here to do it. Is to integrate a bunch of parts all at once. Would anybody like to do that, just to see what happens?

Yeah? Okay. Come on up. Give her a hand. Okay, Linda.

So let me just ask you a question. Would you say that you have some parts at the unconscious level? Yes. Okay. Now, before we actually do anything specifically, let me talk for a moment.

One of the things you can do is if you get a certain part out on the hand and you're going for a higher level of integration, you can chunk up on the part, on any part that you work with by saying, I'd like to talk to the part that's in charge of this part. This particular script on page 248 actually goes right to the top. Okay, this script on page 248 goes right to the top. So let's just see what happens, Linda, when we do this. And can you sort of, what I'd like you to do, if you would, is to sort of get an idea of the level of parts, I don't know, maybe you could ask your unconscious mind, since you're good at communicating with your unconscious mind, what sort of amount of, or like a level of parts that you have right now, and it doesn't need to be a number or anything, because we'll just, we'll look and see what the change is afterward.

The level without knowing the number? Yeah, you could have a number, if you want to have a number, or if you could have it, if this is right now 100% of where you're at right now, I'm going to ask you for another number later on after we get done with this process, just to see. Well, an age comes to pop up in my mind. Okay. 14, age of 14, as far as level. Okay.

And I'm not thinking so much of age as the amount of or the number of parts at the unconscious level or the amount of non-integration that there is present. So less of an age and more of like a number of parts or whatever. So you don't have to give me that number, but let's just say that we took the number of parts that you have right now as 100%. And I'm going to ask you to how much closer you are when we're done with this process. Okay.

Now I understand. Okay. Yeah. Yep. Okay.

As 100%. And I'm going to ask you to how much closer you are when we're done with this process. Okay. Now I understand. Okay.

Yeah. Yep. Okay. So I wonder if I could talk, just for a moment, to the part of you that has no other function but to sort of catalog and keep track of all of the parts at the unconscious level. Okay.

And I'd like to ask that part, what's its highest purpose? Which, when fulfilled, now, will allow that part and a lot of others to integrate into the unconscious mind, totally and completely, right now. Now, notice I'm calibrating her for talking to the part, and we'll see what happens. Well, its purpose was safety, but they're really all together. But it seemed like they would just come out when they want to come out.

Was that easy for you to describe? So let me just ask you a question. In terms of integration, because you noticed something happened. Yeah, they all kind of lined up. You noticed something happening.

Yeah. So in terms of if we were at 100% before, where are we now? Well, they're all lined up. So they're all totally aligned. Are they lined up or are they all integrated?

They're lined up like in a line. Like they're waiting for instructions. Excellent. So here's the instructions. Ask them to consider the highest intention of you as an individual. total being.

And as they consider their highest intention, their highest purpose, I wonder if they could go ahead and get in touch with that purpose, name that purpose now. Which, when complete, would way, I'd like to suggest that if there's any learnings to preserve, that you go ahead and preserve the learnings. And allow your unconscious mind to totally integrate at the unconscious level and be whole and complete. That's much better. Okay.

Wow. It's hot in here. Is it? It must be the energy that's totally freed up. Linda is actually wiping her eyes.

She had some tears in hers now. There's actually additional moisture on her. If I could do a sensory-based description. There's additional moisture on her forehead and on her palms. Yeah, it's hot.

It's actually an overcast day here. Oh, it's hot. Good job. Now let me ask you a question, just for fun. If we were at 100% before in terms of number of parts, what percentage would you say we're at now?

Overall. 100. So were you 100% before in terms of level of parts? Not level of integration, level of parts. What percentage of parts are there now? It's only me.

It's just me. That's good. That's really good. Are you the Buddha? No, I'm the flower.

All right. That's great. Give her a hand. Thank you. Good job.

Thank you. Now, I don't know what that's useful for. Let's see. Integrating every part at the unconscious level totally and completely now so that you were all whole and integrated. I think that's something, whatever that is.

What's that? It is the enlightenment. I actually had to calibrate her. We integrated the controller part, but all the other parts were then waiting. Usually, all the other parts with the controller part, because it's a hierarchical thing.

Her parts just lined up, so I gave them instructions to integrate. They actually integrated. And what you'll find is a lot more congruency now at the unconscious level. I think, Linda, you'll find yourself a lot more congruent, a lot more centered. Yeah.

And our point of view in this little branch of NLP is that we don't need parts to function because your unconscious mind can do it very well, thank you very much, at the unconscious level. So wholeness and completeness is probably a higher state of functioning and a higher ability to be able to produce integrated, whole, complete behavior. Just know one thing. If you actually go for an integration of all the parts at once, you may, depending on the client and how much work the client has done on themselves, you may have other timeline therapy or other things to do. I would suggest before you go for an entire integration at the unconscious level that you would want to, if you're talking to a client, you'd want to look out at the client and notice how much other work they've done with themselves because you may, I would plan more than like five minutes to do it because the client may have other things necessary that needed to be handled along the way.

Okay, that's just sort of a disclaimer and a caveat if you intend to do this, but I personally think that the more integrated we can be at the unconscious level, the better. This is the end of tape seven, side B. Okay, any questions about that? Yes? Is it usually a very close family member who's the major part?

Let's put it this way. I think it's useful if it is. I think it's often someone the person knows, or it's a nondescript part. Some people will often describe a part as, well, this part is sort of yellow and looks like a fuzzy ball or something like that. Or they'll personify it, and then it will be someone, you know, it doesn't have to look exactly like the mother.

It could be... If it's not a close family member, should you search further? No, I'm just looking... No, we're talking about not the overall. We're talking about simply the standard parts integration.

If it's not a close family member, my... No, I don't go any further with it. All I'm looking to do is to integrate the parts. So I don't want to give either part any more solidity or substance than I need to. Right?

So I wouldn't do that. The parts that we have are parts that we've created during our existence. They're not parts that, you know, like how we go back in time. Yeah. Okay?

And we go back past into generations. So what you're saying is how far back could parts go? Yeah. I haven't really worried about that. I figure parts could go as far back as they do.

And since the notion of parts is a sort of timeless model, parts are sort of atemporal, aren't they? Although each of the parts had a moment of creation. But as we work with parts, we don't really worry about where they came from necessarily. Now, that's not always the case because sometimes a part, if you're working with a single part, there may be a significant emotional experience that the client needs to clean up with the parts integration, in which case we'd use timeline therapy. But typically, parts are sort of atemporal.

In the prime directives of the unconscious mind, we mentioned that there's two types of memory storage. One is temporal, which is your timeline, and the other is atemporal. Parts are sort of atemporal, even though they did have a moment of creation. But typically, I don't worry about where the part came from or how long it's been there. I just go for integration.

Is this appropriate to use along with timeline therapy when it comes to disease process? I think it's all... When we get to our model of therapy, which is section 5, page 1, we'll look at what you do during a standard NLP or timeline therapy intervention. I think it's really appropriate to do parts integration at any time when it comes up. And I think it's also appropriate to check for parts to see if they're part of the process of creating the presenting problem.

So if they come up, yes, definitely. And if they're part of the problem, then definitely. And always check on them to make sure or if there's any incongruency at the unconscious level. So if there's somebody who believes in your regular conversation that part of them continues to be sick because that's just the belief system that they've adopted, then you would use the parts integration at that time. I would actually probably force a part.

So I would say, so a client says to me, the only reason I'm sick is because it's part of my belief system. Is that what you're saying they would say? Yeah. And I would say, oh, so there's a part of you that believes you should be sick. For example, if somebody felt that their mother had cancer at a certain age and then they knew that they were going to get it or believed inside themselves that that was something that was looming in their future.

I actually worked with a client like that, very specifically. Her sister had died of cancer and one of her major beliefs was she was going to die of cancer. As far as I know, today she still doesn't have it. And this was, I would say, about six years ago now. And one of the things that we did was we took out any belief with regards to her, any belief in her past, with regards to her having cancer, which we used timeline therapy with.

So if a client has a certain set of beliefs, then I would use timeline therapy process for getting rid of limiting decisions. And that's described in the timeline therapy tape set. What essentially we would, so the client says, I believe I'm going to get cancer, I would say, when did you decide that? And we'd work from the limiting decision that occurred that created that. Now, if I was concerned that the client was also incongruent, then I would also, I would also look and see if there was a part.

So I'd say, oh, so part of you believes you're going to get cancer and part of you doesn't. Is that right? And then the client would say either yes or no. Or if I felt there was some incongruency that required some parts work, then perhaps I would look at it that way. Okay, thanks.

Great. I was just wondering. It's a good thing to wonder. It is. And that means...

And that means I'm going to learn something here. With this one, would I use hierarchy of parts if, say, I had done a couple of parts integrations and just felt that then I'm going to go for the big thing? Like, when would you actually just jump in and go for the big guy? Okay. One of our graduates in Dallas who is a clinical psychologist who sees a number of people who are, should we say, he was actually the director of a mental health organization, used hierarchy of parts and felt that it was the only way to really get through to people who were institutionalized.

So that's one way. If you keep working with a client who keeps having the same presenting problem over and over again, then you would definitely go for hierarchy of parts. Also, for you personally, if you ever wanted, I mean, like, if you wanted to integrate all the various diverse incongruencies at the unconscious level for whatever purpose, perhaps enlightenment or whatever, then you might do that. Because I think that that's also, you know, I think it's also one of the things to do. So there's two elements.

One is working with people who are, say, even perhaps clinical. Another one is for your own personal enlightenment. And essentially it would be that, let's see, it would be perhaps you'd get a part that didn't want to talk to you or that didn't want to, that was recalcitrant perhaps, that didn't want to work with you. You could ask to talk to the part that's in charge of that part or the part that's in charge of that part. You could use it to integrate yourself or you could work with, and you may find you would need it for people who were, let's say, institutionalized, if you were doing work in that area.

Okay, thank you. That's when you'd use it. Linda. I'd like to share this because for all of you that helped me get to a new level here, and I appreciate that. I've been working on my issues, and I know Tad knows that I've been working on it very much.

And I came from a background of a lot of abuse, so those parts were all of that. But Tad and I have been working in group and creating your future and so forth, and I released the anger. Then I was on sadness. He told me, just stay there if you want to be sad. So I did.

I got through that one and been working down that way. So the funny thing is that they really were. The parts were just lined up and they were waiting to be told what to do and I hadn't reached that stage. So maybe perhaps if you're working with someone and you've been clearing a lot of their emotions for them and you know they have a background of many years of abuse, this is a wonderful way. I really feel like everybody got together here.

And I am one person. I really am one person now. Thank you very much. You bet. Definitely.

Excellent, excellent, excellent. Yes? Since you brought it up, I wanted to know how you would do this with yourself. I would have someone else do it, probably. That's just me.

Some people are very capable of working on themselves, and there is a technique which we're going to get to in advanced submodalities, which will allow you to do some similar things on yourself with yourself, but we're not there yet. So that is coming. Personally, I'm sort of, I don't know, inherently lazy, we could say, or laid back, or whatever you want to say, to where I really prefer to work with someone else. However, there is a system where you can work with yourself, and we'll get to that in the advanced submodalities, which is in two days. What's the importance of asking for the name of the part?

In this write-up, that's actually the best way to say it. It's a run-on sentence, and it really seems to work. So is it important for the person to come up with a name for the part? No, because, again, as with most quantum linguistics, we're not actually asking the client to say anything unless we are. No, you know what I'm saying?

The client has to fully consider what we're asking them. So that's really the main thing for this. We saw a whole bunch of demos here, and we're going to take a few more questions, and we're going to do an exercise. Yes? The question I had is when you do a parts integration, you're doing it specifically for one problem, okay?

Now, if parts are aligned in a hierarchy, what would be the point of doing a specific problem if you can blow it all out with a hierarchy? Excellent question. That's really a good question. Let's look at wall chart number 11. I just happen to have this already made up for you.

And here's the thing. Client comes in with a presenting problem which is in the center of this called P. If We go to the highest controlling part. We may be working on P, and we may be working out here also. Now, it's okay for us to ask for a higher level generalization from P, from this particular part.

So we could say, but if we go too far beyond the boundaries of the presenting problem, we run the risk of changing things for the client beyond what the client expected. For example, literally, if you went to the highest controlling part without warning a person, you could literally have the person go to the mountain and become the Buddha, which they would probably be happy about, but it would probably be the last client from that family you ever got or the last client from that business you ever got. And they would go, well, they went to this person and they went back and they joined an ashram and started meditating and shaved their head. That's really strange. You don't want to go see him.

And in fact, there could be unexpected effects from chunking up too high. We'll see this again and again in several different places when there's a warning about how far to go in terms of chunking up. So my rule of thumb personally is if it never comes up for the client or the client never asks me, then I do not go beyond the boundaries that the client has set as being the parameters of the presenting problem. And in some cases, I will look for a higher-level presenting problem. And we were just talking about hierarchy of ideas.

Remember I said this is called logical type. I will look for a higher-level presenting problem in the same logical type, but to not go beyond the parameters of the context in which it appears. Because literally, if you blow... Like, for example, you could have people quitting their jobs. Like, someone could go in for money, not being able to make enough money.

They could end up feeling that money wasn't important. They could end up quitting their job and literally going off and sort of dropping out. And quite frankly, that might not support them for where they were at. So if you go too far in terms of chunking up, you'll go outside the boundaries of the context. And I think it's safer to stay inside the boundaries.

Now, if you have someone who comes to you and says, you know, I want to be enlightened, then you go far out. That's cool. I've got total, you know, license. Let's see what we can do. But interimly, if a client comes to you and says, I want to have better relationships, or this or this, or whatever the presenting problem is, then you probably ought to stay within the same logical type of that.

That's my opinion. So if you went to the controlling part and integrated all the parts, you might have some experiences which were unpredictable. That's the only reason to not go beyond those parameters. Okay? So being you already did that work with Linda, you already had the clearance to go ahead and...

Yeah, I said to Linda, or I said to everyone, who would like to look at integrating a lot of parts at the unconscious level? And I already mentioned what the possible results could be. Good enough for me. Yeah. So I personally felt that the ecology was present, and I think you ought to look very much at ecology before you do that.

We're going to recommend that before you do any work like this of a global nature, that you take a detailed personal history with a clamp. This is part of the Master Timeline Therapy training, and for those of you who are listening to the tapes, it's on the Master Timeline Therapy tape set. I would recommend a detailed personal history, and then, with that in mind, you have a direction to go in, or you have an idea of where to move. Now, here's a caveat, too, by the way. If you go for hierarchy of parts, and you go for integrating a lot of different parts, if you haven't gotten rid of a lot of negative emotions at the unconscious level, you may also have to deal with those.

I mentioned that in passing as we started, but let me just be real specific. If a client has trauma or abuse and you attempt to integrate all the parts that were part of that, if you haven't released the negative emotions that were underlying that, you'll have to deal with those immediately. And I mean in the process of integrating those parts, those emotions will have to be dealt with one way or another, and that may indicate timeline therapy. So you should be prepared for that as we do this next exercise, and you should ask your partner in this exercise, is there any trauma and abuse in your past? Because in terms of doing this, we haven't gotten to our timeline therapy segment in this class yet.

And if there are a lot of unresolved negative emotions at the unconscious level, then those may also have to be dealt with, in a sense, and handled. So that's another caveat on going for all the parts. And with Linda, I'd seen her in enough recent trainings, I knew pretty much where she was at. I'd seen her at the Secret of Creating a Future, and we talked during the Accelerated and I had a sense that she'd integrated enough of the negative emotions. She actually was dealing with some specific things, and I knew exactly what they were.

So I was prepared to do timeline therapy with her on the spot if she needed it, and I thought for a moment she was going to, actually, and then she didn't. So it was cool. Yeah. Okay? Yep.

I noticed when you were working on me and you said, are there any more parts that would like to join in, the answer was some, but not all. And I felt like there were some out there that wouldn't mind but didn't want to. Right. So I'm just wondering, in that case with a client, do you try to bring the whole lot in at once, or do you just work on the ones that want to be there? Great question.

If the hands are coming together, usually what I do is allow the hands to continue. I'm not going to stop the hands from coming together. So I allow the hands to simply come together like that. And the ones that are out there that don't want to integrate, then that's fine. Now, if the hands were not coming together, then I would say all the parts that would like to integrate, or were at once part of this larger whole, have them check their highest intentions, etc.

If the hands were not coming together, then we'd look for all the different parts' highest intentions and make sure they were the same, and then the hands could come together and all of those other parts could integrate. But usually, when the client's hands are coming together, I'm not going to stop the process. Because to me, it's an unconscious process that's going to happen, and I don't want to slow it down. So in that sense, I'm not going to get into the detail of, does this part want to integrate or not? We'll just have all the parts that want to come in and integrate to be able to do that.

That may just be me or the way I feel about it. Like if the client's hands are coming together, even if I suggested it, it means to me that there's a significant percentage of the parts at the unconscious level ready to get to do it and get done with the process right away. So that's why I did what I did. If the client then says, well, there are still some parts out there and they would like to integrate. Then we'd go back and do it again.

You'd do it again. Yep. Make sure they get their highest intention. Make sure they get their highest intention handled. Make sure all the parts that were once part of the larger whole are clear that they were and are of the same highest intention.

And then integrate them all again. Yep. But that's not going to stop the presenting problem from working. I mean, the presenting problem still worked because we integrated the two major parts that created that presenting problem that gave us the wide range of dichotomy on wall chart number 10, the two Y parts, the two widest apart parts. The others, that's just sort of, to me, that's just sort of icing on the cake or gravy on the mashed potatoes kind of to say to the other parts, hey, come on, let's all get together.

And it gives us a little more broad-based integration to occur a little more deeper integration at the unconscious level. But I don't feel that it's absolutely necessary to the process either. It's just kind of a nice thing to add on to me. One of the rules of thumb is if it ain't broke, don't fix it. So with your integration, the presenting problem, which occurred, if the presenting problem is no longer a problem, then I wouldn't dig it up again.

It's like you plant a flower, the flower starts growing, you're not going to go, gee, I wonder if I need to dig this up and replant it. It's going good. Just let it grow. My rule of thumb is if you test and the client's congruent, then test again the next day, see if the client's still congruent. If the client's still congruent, then pretty much you're done.

My point of view also about all this is that parts integration in and of itself is almost never the only intervention I use. So when you say, did this work, did this specific parts integration work, or did this one work, or did this one work, for me, parts integration is something that happens in the context of a much larger process that goes on, which is all on Section 5, Page 1, the entire model of therapy, which we'll get to, the entire model of doing a specific integration, which we'll get to, or a specific entire personal breakthrough session or whatever, which is coming up. But since you guys are so quick, it won't be here anyway until we get there. When they start to get to the threshold of their boundaries when you're chunking up, and they begin to lose... Isn't that fun to watch that, by the way?

Yeah, but they also seem to seem to go sideways. They do. Some people do. And the problem I usually have is breaking through to getting up past the threshold to blow it out so you can get the highest intention. Yeah, sometimes I'll actually point out to the client, hey, you're chunking sideways, like I did today.

Or I decide I want to point out to you that's a chunk down. Or if they don't know NLP, I'll go, hey, you know, I just want you to know that's more specific and what we're looking for is a little more abstract, so what's the purpose? And I'll stay then at the previous purpose. Did you notice I didn't take the chunk down as for what purpose, I stayed at the previous purpose, which was the higher level chunk. And if you stay there, and you just sort of gently persist with that, eventually the part will come up and go outside the boundaries.

Yeah. Okay, so it's time to do an exercise. And sometime in the future, when you see a client, you'll actually be called upon, I think, to make a decision as to what what particular intervention you're going to use. So we have a number of interventions which are possible here, and they are the standard parts integration, which is on page 332, or the linguistic parts integration, which is on page... You know, I'm sorry these parts are so spread out in the notebook.

I was going to put all the parts in the same place, but part of me wouldn't let me. So the linguistic parts integration is under linguistics, and the parts parts part is with values. Anyway, the linguistic part integration is on 247, and the hierarchy of parts is on 248. What I'd like you to do is to get together with a client, pick a presenting problem, and go ahead and do one of these, whichever one would be most appropriate, and we're going to do this in groups of two. So get with someone else, and we're going to do this in groups of two.

One thing that I want to point out is that at this point, it's possible that if you pick a presenting problem which is a major presenting problem, and if you haven't done a fair amount of timeline therapy, you may have to do timeline therapy to solve the presenting problem you're trying to integrate. And we'd like to ask you to save that for when we get to timeline therapy. Because in terms of the time we've got, it's not going to work for us to pull out the stops and stop the training and have a couple of hours of timeline therapy. So be aware of what your presenting problem is in terms of the depth of it. We're going to get to timeline therapy