# Nlp&Healing, Dr.Hammer, Assumptions, Sympathetic&Parasympathetic

All right, so as we begin to wrap up this master practitioner training, I want to just go back and review a little, and I want to talk about NLP and healing in the big picture. We've certainly got a lot of detailed information about NLP and healing in the master practitioner timeline therapy tape set and in the master hypnosis tape set, which is called Deep Transphenomena. I hope that we have answered and I hope also called attention to you for you to begin to look at and to also pay attention a little bit differently to some of the questions that you have or perhaps you didn't have. Like, for example, the questions why, what, how, and what if. And I also hope that we've actually created some new ones for you to look at.

As we move into NLP and healing, and by the way, we just looked at slide number 112, gone back and reviewed slide number 112. And as we begin to look at NLP and healing, we're going to start with the proposition that everyone is whole, W-H-O-L-E, and it's your nervous system is whole and universal in scope, and that you can actually access that state at any time, assuming the proper technique and a neurology that is open and clear. One way to get in touch with the wholeness of who you are is the process of, as you already know, because so many of you had such great results with it, Hakala or peripheral vision. And we've experienced a number of different ways that those internal patterns that drive our neurology can produce beneficial healing states. We're already clear about that.

So let's talk about healing. And I think the first question we have to ask, perhaps we want to ask is, in the process of healing, is what is life? We may have to ask the Buddha for that. But we don't have to go that far. We could ask Chopra, Deepak Chopra.

Deepak Chopra says that life is a sexually transmitted disease from which there's no cure. Yeah, really? I thought you'd like that. Yeah, except for the Buddha. Okay, so Chopra says that 98% of the molecules in your body are brand new every year.

If 98% of your body is brand new, how could disease persist? He says that you have a brand new stomach lining every five days. You have brand new skin every 30 days. You have a brand new liver every six weeks. All the soft tissue in your body is replaced on the average of every three months.

And 98% of the body is brand new every year. And he also says that every single cell in the body can live, not the cells in your body, but every single type of cell in your body can live alone in nature. As a single-celled organism, live a completely healthy life, a full, totally healthy life, and then die. And the question then is, what causes the cells to not be totally healthy in a person's body? That's the question that I've been looking at since we began to look at NLP and healing.

And I think I did my first tape set on NLP and healing in 1989, which became part of the previous Master Practitioner tape set. So for me, this is sort of coming full cycle. And a lot of the questions that we began to answer when we put together that tape set, and a lot of the questions we began to look at when we put together this tape set, but it brings everything around. Let me postulate something. Disease occurs in a human body when the cells themselves forget their context.

Disease occurs in the human body when a cell or a group of cells forgets their context and thus becomes not aligned with or connected with the whole. Chopra puts it another way. He says disease occurs when the cells forget their dharma and dharma is a East Indian word for job or duty or function in life. It actually has broader context than that. It actually has a many lifetime context in the East Indian philosophy.

In other words, they forget what they're supposed to do. Chopra doesn't actually tell us how, but I think Dr. Goodwin would say that Paul Goodwin, who is a neurophysicist at Alaska Pacific University and who I've quoted a number of times during this training, he and I did a tape set called NLP in Neurophysics in, I think, 1991. And Chopra doesn't tell us how the cells forget their dharma, but essentially it's the blockage of information through the neural network pathways. So in other words, what Goodwin says is that our behavior is based on sets of activated neural networks.

And the level of activated neural networks, by the way, is called activated neural network density, which is abbreviated A-N-D, which essentially is the same as activated neural network density, or will be when you activate all your neural networks. And what Goodwin says is that there can be functional blockage that, that impede the flow of information through the neural network pathways. We've dealt with this from the beginning of this training. We've talked about language and how it creates boundaries. And then we've, we've looked at how to go beyond the boundaries linguistically.

We've looked at how problems are also part of that notion of boundary-ness. And we actually talked about from the beginning of this training if you'll remember the slide and also page 331 which has the discussion of parts where we looked at all of the possibilities of how boundaries are created inside the nervous system and we said it was essentially a range. And then we've looked at the solution for that, which is essentially going out beyond the context or going out beyond the boundaries and allowing the client to experience what was bound as being unbounded. There's a medical doctor in Germany that has a very similar, well, he was actually in Austria, that has a very similar theory. And essentially, the theory was that, and his theory was that, is that cancer is always and without exception preceded by a negative significant emotional experience one to three years prior to the first onset of symptomology.

He's written a couple of books in German, which we hired a German medical doctor to translate, and which we'll be talking about during the timeline therapy segment. But essentially what is this theory, and I'm going to paraphrase it in English as best that I can, and we're going to spend a moment looking at Walsh chart number 23. And essentially the theory, the theory goes like this. If we take and we look at the sympathetic nervous system, which is the S above the line and the parasympathetic nervous system, which is the P below the line, that normally as we go through life, we're supposed to alternate back and forth between the sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous system. This horizontal line is time.

It's a timeline. And let's say that right here where the X is, that there occurs some significant emotional experience. Especially if it's a large one, what will happen is that will send the client into sympathetic functioning, which is the functioning of stress. The longer the client functions in a stress mode, the greater the level of boundaries that are built up. The longer that the client functions in a stress mode, the greater the level of boundaries that are built up.

As soon as the client can come back to equilibrium, then the client must also go into parasympathetic functioning to balance that off. So life is about balance. And the process of assisting a client in going into Hakalao, or going into peripheral vision, allows us to go very quickly and balance off the stress of working with the sympathetic nervous system and allows us to go beyond the boundaries of that and go into the parasympathetic functioning. Which, I don't know if you noticed this, but each client, when they made a major breakthrough during this training, each of the demonstration subjects when they made a major breakthrough. No matter what the process was, whether it was working with quantum linguistics, whether it was Hakala or any of the other processes and techniques that we used, when we fed them back their strategy, et cetera, et cetera, we'd notice a shift in the color, wouldn't we?

We'd notice a shift in the color, a shift in the skin tonus, and all of which were indicative of the client being in a more positive state, and in many cases being indicative of the client moving into parasympathetic functioning. So in any case, when the client goes beyond their boundaries, or when the client's attention and awareness goes beyond the boundaries, what happens is that we move into that expanded state, and the conditions are set up wherein we can begin to heal ourselves. The conditions are set up wherein the body's own functioning, the body's own mechanisms for healing actually begin, and we begin to move into the parasympathetic functioning. which is essentially the healing state. There are seven things which I think are appropriate to consider when looking at the process of the interaction between the mind and the body and the process of healing when you're working with a client. This article appeared in the Journal of the American Board of Neurolinguistic Programming in the fall of 1996 edition of the American Board of Neurolinguistic Programming and was written by Dr.

Susan Chu. Dr. Chu is a medical doctor from Hong Kong and is also one of our ABNLP institutes and Timeline Therapy Institute and also one of our master trainers. There are seven things which are important to consider in the process of mind-body therapy or in the process of doing healing, and I'd like to talk with you about them for just a moment. But I think these things are issues which are indicative and that one ought to pay attention to as we begin to look at the process of healing.

First of all, number one, all healing is self-healing. All healing is self-healing. Your role is to coach and provide a roadmap, or the way I say it is to be a tour guide. My whole metaphor for that is tour guide. I tell the client I wear the funny shirts and I wear the nuts around my neck.

And I say to the client, look this way, look that way, what happens to your problem? And what happens is we set up the conditions where a healing will take place. The second thing is that the client has free will. The client has free will. I know that's obvious, but oftentimes the client's unconscious mind may have reasons for the client not wanting to get well.

Oftentimes the client may have reasons for, called secondary gain, by the way. And handling that secondary gain is really critical to the success of any process. Third thing is the belief. Remember that based on quantum physics and also quantum biology that the observer in any system always affects the system. I think Andre Weizenhofer in General Techniques of Hypnotism, 1957, George Estabrook, 1943.

These are probably the two books I quote the most in terms of hypnosis and hypnotic techniques and also this issue. Essentially what these two gentlemen said is the client in hypnosis will not actualize the beliefs that the hypnotherapist does not believe to be true. A client in hypnosis will not actualize what you do not believe to be true. So if you take on a client, if you sit there and you're questioning a client, and the client, you know, hey, client this, this, and this, and you're talking to him, and all of a sudden you find that you do not have a congruent belief that your intervention is going to produce the results, then the notion of the quantum field essentially tells us that you need to change your beliefs or refer your client out to someone else. And the more you work with, the more you work with individuals, the more you work with, and work with individuals on this level, and the more success you have in this regard, the more, the better your results will be.

As you begin to work with clients, for example, and use the techniques that you're learning here, including timeline therapy and hypnosis and so forth, the more you have a chance to talk to your clients and notice that they get rid of things that look amazingly tough for them. But as they make miraculous changes in front of your eyes, like for example, I'm sitting in Orlando, Florida. This woman comes up to me. She says, I've got a lump in my breast and we just found it. And what do I do?

I said, well, I've only got two hours before we get on the plane, but let's see what we can do. And so we did two hours of an intervention, which essentially was a detailed personal history with me talking at a very quick speed, just to get her going. And we found out some things. And using timeline therapy, we managed to assist her in changing that, and we changed some values very quickly. And on the way home on the plane, she said the lump disappeared.

Now, fortunately, there was someone else there with her, because what I wanted to do was just to check and make sure that there was someone to verify that. And one of our other assistants who had gone home with her essentially said that on the way home, the lump, the swelling actually disappeared. The lump went down, and the swelling actually disappeared. That's the kind of thing that will change your belief structure. Because when she called me on the phone, she went, you know, that lump that I just had that I was working with you with totally disappeared in two hours on the airplane home.

Now, I had other clients with whom we'd done various things, such as ulcers and cancer and so forth, where there'd been some really promising results. But to have a client call me and say that she herself, and also one of our assistants outside her, verified that something like that disappeared in two hours, tells me that there's something else going on here. It totally changed my beliefs about what was possible. But it also pointed me to another one of the laws, or to another one of our theories of mind-body therapy. And that is that the body has an innate intelligence as to the mechanics of healing.

Now, with regards to this client that I worked with, I didn't tell her what to do. I didn't suggest to her unconscious mind what to do specifically to heal this up. As we'll see when we get into the healing paradigm, which we'll get into in our hypnosis training. I didn't say to her specifically, do this, do this, do this, do this, do this. What we did was we did timeline therapy and get rid of the root cause at the unconscious level, whatever the root cause was of the problem.

And then I said, does your unconscious mind know what to do to heal this? Does your unconscious mind know what to do to heal this? And her unconscious mind said yes. Assuming that that's sufficient, then what's going to happen is the client's going to actually heal the condition. Now there are some other things I think that one needs to be specific enough about, but the specificity in that case simply includes the amount of time that it's going to take and pinning down the unconscious mind and getting the unconscious mind's agreement that it's going to do that.

Consider this for a moment. The history books in Hawaii are filled with the history of anaana, which was the death prayer. And in ancient times, when the kahuna would put a death prayer on or cast a spell on a victim, the victim would die with no discernible medical condition being present. This is also true in the voodoo tradition also, where the priest casts a spell and the person person actually dies and the person doesn't even know doesn't even have to know how to die which essentially I think demonstrates the tremendous power of the mind in producing some kind of results although this is a negative one but what's important conversely is that you don't have to know how to get well in order to get well. Think about that for just a minute if you're dealing with a specific resenting problem like a dis-ease.

You do not necessarily have to know how to get well. As long as there's a congruent decision to get well, and the unconscious mind congruently agrees to it, and congruent means that it's totally free from negative emotions and disenabling beliefs and or conflicts. This has gotten more leverage in producing results than working on the mechanics of healing, such as what diet to take or whatever. The next thing I'd like to point out in this regard is that the origin of disease is not the same as disease. Number five.

The body having an innate intelligence was number four. Number five, the origin of disease is not the same as the disease. Here's an example. If smoking is the cause of lung cancer, then everyone who smokes should get cancer. And no one who doesn't smoke should.

Actually, if a virus is the cause of flu, then everyone who breathes the same air where there's a virus present should get flu. If the herpes simplex 3 virus is the cause of genital herpes, then everyone who comes in contact with the herpes simplex 3 virus should get genital herpes. Actually, the fact is that only 2% of people in the United States actually ever have symptoms of genital herpes. But do you know how many people in the United States have a herpes simplex 3 virus in their body? It's roughly 90%.

Question is, does the herpes simplex 3 virus cause herpes? Does the flu virus cause flu? Does smoking cause lung cancer? These are questions I think you're going to need to answer for yourself, but think about it for just a minute. If you and I were watching TV and the set went and the TV picture went off, isn't that what your TV usually does when it goes off?

Mine does, anyway. And we called a TV repairman and he comes in and he goes, it needs a new integrated circuit. So he holds this up and looks at us. So we stick the new integrated circuit in, and the TV picture comes back. If we didn't know anything about television, we might conclude that all the pictures that came on the TV set were inside that integrated circuit.

As we stuck a new integrated circuit in, that's what made it work. That's essentially what allopathic medicine does when it treats the body. So allopathic medicine goes in and perhaps replaces a part of the body, but doesn't actually look at what other things are coming in to the TV set from the outside that may actually cause the picture. It doesn't actually look at what causes the picture necessarily other than simply replacing the integrated circuit that was replaced. According to Deepak Chopra, once again, the ultimate origin of disease can only be discovered at the non-physical level.

The ultimate origin of disease can only be accomplished by looking at the non-physical level. Like, for example, why don't some people get the flu? And, of course, if you look at CNN this week, and this is just one of my pet peeves, they now have the Robitussin, I wonder why Robitussin sponsors it, cold and flu report. Did you see that? Dan's in the back going, yep.

And now they have the cities. They go, these cities are on alert for cold and flu. And then the next one goes, and these cities will have heavy cold and flu in five weeks. How do they know that? How do they know that?

Like what, is there some guy out there cranking flu bugs out in five weeks? He's over here. He can't get to your city yet. Hold on, folks. Don't have the cold and flu yet.

Just wait. Or what is that? Well, of course, Chopra would say it's essentially at the level of the mind. And if you consider that the immune system is psychosomatic, and even if it's not fully psychosomatic, it's psychosomatic to a large degree, which essentially means that it has a lot to do with the mind, then it begins to make sense. Okay, two more concepts, two more assumptions I'd like you to consider.

The next is that mind-body healing needs to be accompanied by a significant shift in consciousness or a major change in lifestyle. Mind-body healing, when healing occurs, is usually accompanied by shifts in consciousness or shifts in, or major changes in lifestyle. This is one of my experiences, too. In all the work that I've done with clients that had dis-eases that looked like they were life-threatening, particularly cancer and AIDS. The clients that I've worked with, the ones that have been the most successful in regaining their health, and we've had a lot of real positive results, have made changes in their lifestyle or changes in their surroundings or at least significant shifts in their consciousness, their awareness, or their focus.

In other words, they need to be prepared to change their beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors, which probably will include values. And the more severe or the more life-threatening disease is, then the bigger the transformation that's likely to happen if the person survives it. To the extent that a client's willing to do whatever it takes to make the changes, then there's more chance of getting well. Here's an example. A woman came to me and she'd had, in the last seven years, she'd had eight operations or chemotherapy for specific cancer in specific areas of the body.

And when she came to me, I shook her hand and her hands were cold and clammy and they wheeled her in a wheelchair and she was in really bad shape. So I said to her, if we're going to accomplish this, we're going to need to do whatever it takes, and that may include radical lifestyle changes on your part. Are you willing to do that? And she said yes. So we began the process, and in the process, as was predicted, she shifted from sympathetic functioning, which is hands cold and clammy.

She looked really gray when I saw her. And she shifted. She had a real shift in the physiology of her, the color change in her face. And when I said goodbye to her that night, her hands were warm, which indicates a shift to parasympathetic functioning. When she went home, she ate a good meal for the first time in weeks and slept really well that night and came back to see me the next day.

The next day, when I first saw her, it was like she was gray. I mean really gray. Have you seen someone who's like really sick? She was gray. I mean really gray.

When I saw her the next day, she'd put on makeup. She'd fixed her hair. Her face was pink. She looked to me like she was in much better shape. We then finished the therapy.

I used timeline therapy and hypnosis, essentially. We finished the process, and then she went back to the place where she was. And one of the interesting things was I said to her, what happened, you know, one to three years prior to the first onset of symptoms, which is one of the questions that I ask oftentimes a client when doing healing work. And she said, oh, let's see. She said, three years prior to the first onset of symptoms, I got engaged to my present husband.

And I said, what happened? What happened? And she said, well, right after I got the first cancer, she said, we got married. I said, how's the relationship? She says, terribly abusive.

I said, well, you're probably going to have to get out of that relationship in order for this change to work. Are you willing to do that? She said, yes. However, she went back to the same relationship she was in, and what happened was the cancer then reoccurred itself, or reoccurred again, and she died. Because she was also not willing to make changes and do whatever it took to do that, or perhaps because there was secondary gain, or perhaps because, as one of our theories is, is that cancer is oftentimes nature's way of letting us out of the bargain of life in a way which is socially acceptable, that she finally got what essentially she wanted to do, which was to get out of the relationship in the only way that she knew how.

So many clients, in order to make the change, are going to have to transform their lives, and they need to be willing to do whatever it takes. If they are, there's a real good chance of getting well. And the final thing I'd like to mention is, and this is real interesting, you also need to be non-attached to the outcome. Your wanting to heal the client may set up some codependent issues or your unconscious projections, which if you're especially overly desirous of the client to heal, may limit your flexibility as a therapist. The best attitude is probably to be loving and supportive while being able to notice that the client is magnificent whether or not the client chooses to live or not.

Whether or not the client chooses to live or not. So let's spend a moment with those seven ideas in mind, those seven concepts of, or seven laws of mind-body therapy, and look at how allopathic medicine deals with disease. Allopathic medicine is the current medical treatment available in the United States and in most westernized countries. Allopathic medicine is a standard medicine practiced by medical doctors. Typically in allopathic medicine, the focus is on the dis-ease and not on the process, and they've actually taken and nominalized the word.

So, for example, a client comes to the doctor. The doctor says, you have hyper-tension. And the client goes, oh, no. And what has been forgotten is that the process of hypertension is a process of hyper-tensing oneself. The process of hypertension is a process of hypertensing oneself.

The process of hypertension is a process of hypertensing oneself, and if one can hypertense oneself, it's also possible to not hypertense oneself. By the way, as I begin to talk a little bit about allopathic medicine, one of the things I want to say is that I'm very much in favor of allopathic medicine for quite a few things. And there are a lot of really good medical doctors on the planet. And most of the medical doctors that I've met are really, really good people. And they have really, really good hearts.

And what I'm talking about is not the doctors themselves, but the process of allopathic medicine, which in the United States even today is coming more and more under scrutiny or at least beginning to rethink, even the medical doctors themselves are beginning to rethink the way they look at disease. In addition, allopathic medicine also says primarily or at least focuses on the physical cause of the disease, although, in the last five years, this has actually changed quite a bit. There are many medical doctors, even today, who focus simply on the physical side of the origin of the disease. That is to say, they don't have any idea of looking at the energy systems in the body, such as the Chinese or Japanese systems do, and they don't have any idea of looking at the mental cause, which we look at in timeline therapy, NLP, and hypnosis. According to allopathic doctors, a cure is not possible unless it's an allopathic cure.

This is an interesting thought. So statistically, statistically in allopathic medicine, if there's a spontaneous remission, that's not counted. In fact, those spontaneous remissions are actually, I'm not going to say covered up, but are certainly swept under the rug and not looked at in the process of how allopathic medicine works. Allopathic medicine does not include these people who have spontaneous remissions, and perhaps we should, as NLP practitioners, master practitioners, go out and model those people. Here are some things that we've discovered about people that survive cancer, for example.

And I can't say that we've discovered it. This is pretty much currently accepted. There's a significant, the people who tend to survive cancer are the people who tend to be most apt to survive cancer from an allopathic point of view are those people who are essentially non-cooperative with the process of the medical process. In other words, these people were judged to not be a good patient by the medical doctor. One possibility might be, if you look at wall chart number four, one possibility is that the patient may have taken too much of their own cause or might have taken too much of their own hand in the issue of cause or at least taking responsibility for changing what needed to be changed.

And in that case, it didn't necessarily fit into the allopathic system. In ancient times, physicians always took into account the patient's personality and the patient's past. In fact, in Hawaii, the idea was to do ho'oponopono. And one of the major theories was to do ho'oponopono so that the medicine may work its effect. In other words, the medical doctors of ancient times in Hawaii, the herbal healers, had a saying, and the saying was, do hoʻoponopono, which is essentially to let go of any encumbrances or connections that are around you, which includes those of the people who may be connected to you, on a mental level so that the medicine can actually work.

And that was thought to be very vital in the process. In ancient Greece, Hippocrates talked about the four temperaments and the relationship to health. We have a rough equivalent to the four temperaments in NLP. And the rough equivalent to four temperaments are the visual, the auditory, the kinesthetic internal, and the kinesthetic external. So just think of V, A, kinesthetic internal, kinesthetic external.

And those four temperaments are related directly to the four elements of ancient Greece, which were fire, air, water, and earth. So that the visual person would be more fiery, the auditory person would be more air, the kinesthetic person would be more water, internal, kinesthetic internal would be more water, and the kinesthetic external would be more earth. But two things happened. Two things essentially happened in medicine. And one of them was the leaving out of energy out of the equation.

That happened in two separate occasions. One was a debate between Hippocrates and Democritus and left us with the notion of atomistic or non-atomistic source of the body. And the atomistic people essentially said that we cannot imagine any healing power in an atom. This was the debate between Hippocrates and Democritus. We cannot imagine healing power in an atom, therefore there cannot be any healing power in an atom or energy in an atom, therefore the human body does not have energy to heal itself.

And that debate continued on until Franz Anton Mesmer was debunked by the commission of the French king, which we'll talk a little bit about during our hypnosis training, in the late 1700s, when, at which point, the notion of energy was left out of Western medicine and Western healing. And at the same time, a second debate occurred, because we've mentioned, remember, two things. We've mentioned energy and we've mentioned the instrument of mind. And for political and religious reasons, mind and body became separated during the Middle Ages, and primarily at that time, the mind became the domain of the church, and the body became the domain of the physician. And this was primarily due to the work of Descartes, who essentially separated the two, and my guess is for safety reasons.

For safety reasons. This is the end of Tape 28, Side A.