# Mbti

Okay, next one is internal state, and the question is whether a person is thinking or feeling. The thinker, the person who is a thinker, is going to evaluate the external world based on what they think about it. And the feeler, and by the way, in the Myers-Briggs feeling isn't just related to internal kinesthetics. What they also mean is the evaluative feelings, which are essentially values. So the feeler in Myers-Briggs deals more with values, and the thinker in Myers-Briggs deals more with logic and reasonableness and rationalness.

For example, do you more often let your heart rule your head or your head rule your heart is one of the questions that they ask in order to determine whether a person is a thinker or a feeler. Another one that they ask is, is it a higher compliment to be called a person of real feeling or a consistently reasonable person? So the thinker is going to be more logical, reasonable, and rational. The feeler is going to be someone who's more into values and also into their feelings. Let me give you one other one.

Let's see. Do you usually value sentiment more than logic, or do you usually value logic more than sentiment? So, in this case, the Myers-Briggs is essentially looking for whether a person is using the thinking, the left brain, logical, reasonable, rational thinking in order to evaluate their external world or their feelings. And any one of those questions is useful. Let's see, the percentages for thinker and feeler are 50-50, with a 5% bias for sex.

I love that. Which means that men are 5% more thinkers generally than women, and women are 5% more feelers generally than men. Does that make sense? Right? Okay.

And I did not give you the percentages for sensor-intuitor, which is also 75-25. 75 sensor, 25% intuitor. This is all in the reading material, by the way. And those of you who are listening to tapes, this is just review. Yeah, well, that's the third one, thinking and feeling. And so the question which you can use to hopefully to grasp, or a question you can use hopefully to grasp whether a person is a thinker or a feeler.

You can often tell, but you could say, is it more important for you that you're thought of as a consistently reasonable, rational person, or that you're a feeling, caring person? That's going to probably, unless they know what you want, which the nice thing about some of our standard metaprogram questions is that they're not immediately obvious as to what we're looking for. Okay, and then the fourth one is the temporal operator, which is time and judge or perceiver. And the percentage is 50-50 each with no bias for sex. And judge your perceiver is, there's about a 90% correlation between judge your perceiver and how your timeline is organized.

So you could simply elicit how the person's timeline is organized. However, if your timeline is organized in a way which is different from the way that you test on the Myers-Briggs, it's possible that the micro-elicitation of your timeline, that is to say the smaller details of your timeline, may not have been fully elicited. So, for example, it's possible that you could be a judger and have a timeline that had your future in front of you and your past behind you if you had a portion of the timeline that ran across in front of you. So if you look at wall chart number 15, and this is our person here, if the timeline came on like this, and then let's just say it went like that, so the timeline came on in front, right, from the future, but just before it went behind the person, it actually curved around, and if a person had, for example, recent past here between the two arrows, then that would be enough to make a person a low judger. Actually, any organization in the timeline other than the two major front to back or left to right organization is going to give combinations of both and may be unpredictable as to the ex, what those are exactly are going to do with the Myers-Briggs.

But again, for example, inh Art 15, if you have some portion of your timeline that runs across in front of you, that could be enough to move you over into the lower judger column. So that's why there could be differences as to how your timeline was elicited. So that's one way to discover whether a person's a judge or a perceiver is their timeline. Here's a question, though, that I think is kind of fun. The question is, if you're going to go somewhere and do something, would you want to plan it out?

Or would you be okay with just going and doing it? My parents are great examples of that. My dad was a geographer, and I think he was definitely a judger because whenever he went anywhere, he would make their reservations a year in advance. I mean, I can't even conceive of that personally. I mean, he was a great guy, but geez, a year.

What happens if you change your mind, you know? I mean, to me, you know? And so we're going, I'm going off to Italy to teach a trainer's training in Italy, and my mom's going with me. This is about like eight or nine years ago now. We were teaching a trainer's training in Italy, in Italian.

I didn't speak Italian, but they did. And we're off to Italy, and it's three months before we're going, and my mom says, do you have the tickets yet? And I went, tickets? I said, I don't even have reservations. And she went, you don't?

It's like she could not conceive of going to Italy without reservations more than three months in advance. And I'm going, no, no, no. Give me another month or two before we nail this down. I mean, after all. And you may want to, if you're going to elicit something like that, tell a story similar to that.

If you're going somewhere or going to do something, the question is, do you need to plan it out well in advance or would you just prefer to go and do it? And that's going to give you the issue of judger or perceiver. The, let's see, the judger and the perceiver also points to, now this is where the Myers-Briggs gets interesting. The judger and perceiver and the introvert and extrovert also point to which of these is more important or which of these is more emphasized. So from the point of view of Myers-Briggs, this is interesting information because it will tell you how people sort information.

It will tell you how they process information coming in from the outside. So let's look at page 3-2. Someone who is a judger will evaluate their external world based on their thinking or... Well, let me stop for a second. If you write at the top of page 3-2, this is true for extrovert, then that will help you.

So page 3-2 is true if the person's an extrovert. Okay, now, someone who is a judger will evaluate their external world based on their thinking or their feeling. So a judger will evaluate what's going on around him or her by how he or she thinks or feels about it. So a judger is evaluating the external world based on thinking and feeling. And one of those will be predominant.

So a T.J., someone who's a thinker and a judger, will evaluate their external world based on their thinking, and someone who's a F.J. will evaluate their external world based on their feeling. Someone who is a perceiver will pay more attention to the sensing, sensory input and or the intuition. So if you're a perceiver, and that, by the way, remember, if you're in time or through time, there's probably a pretty close correlation. If you're in time, you're probably a perceiver. If you're through time, you're probably a judger.

Someone who is a perceiver will be evaluating their external world based on their sensing and or their intuition. So the sensor-intuitor and the thinker and feeler, one of those is going to be predominant as to how the person evaluates the external world. Okay, so let's stop for a moment, because I want to give you back your tests, but first I want you to ask yourself the question of, am I a, on 3.1, the questions you just wrote down, am I an introvert or an extrovert? And ask yourself that question. Just ask yourself the question that you have there.

When it's time to recharge my batteries, do I prefer to be alone or with people? We're actually just compiling some statistics, so we'll take a show of hands here. Just check off which, or just make a little note of which you think you are. Okay, next is internal process. So ask yourself the question of sensor or intuitor.

Ask yourself the question of... You wrote the question down. Just ask yourself the question of sensor or intuitor. And the main issue here is, are you into the facts, the details, or are you into the relationships between the ideas that the facts and details represent? So ask yourself that question.

Okay? And then thinker or feeler. Thinker or feeler, do you value logic, reasonableness, rationalness more than caring, feelings, and values? Or do you value caring, feelings, and values more than you value logic, reasonableness, and rationalism? Which is more important to you?

Okay, and then the third one. Don't do in time or through time. Do the other question. The question I gave you, just for fun. Which is, if you're going to go somewhere and do something, would it be important to you to plan it out?

Or would it be more important just to go and do it? And, you know, the people who are judges, they're the folks that have the, you know, the day timers and like them. A good judger, now, a good judger, not a half, you know, baked judger, but a real solid judger, at the drop of a hat will make a list. And if they have five minutes, they might make two or three lists. Because a person who's a judger knows that there's a right way to do everything.

And there's a certain number of steps and sequences in the steps. And the person who's a perceiver will just do it. No list. Don't have to get organized. We're just going to go.

We're on our way. So the question is, which are you? The question was, can you be a bit of both? Of course. You can be, well, in the Myers-Briggs now, when we're about, we're just about to look at our test that we all, that we scored.

In the Myers-Briggs now, the range from introvert, actually the range on all of these is the center line is zero, and there's a range from about 55 to 65 points on either side of zero. So one could be a 55 extrovert or a 55 introvert, and so there's a range from 0 to 55. And the Myers-Briggs feels that approximately that, let's see, the Myers-Briggs feels that approximately anything 15 or under is on the cusp. They don't use that term. Because that comes from astrology, and we wouldn't want to be too weird.

If we were doing Myers-Briggs, we'd have to put on a tie. I'd have to give up wearing Aloha shirts and kukui nuts, which would be next to impossible. So did you all get what you think you are? Okay, good. All right.

So everybody got what they think they are. We're going to pass out the test. Oh, by the way, if you're listening to this tape set and you did not receive a Myers-Briggs test in the tape set, please call the office at 1-800-800-MIND and request a Myers-Briggs test, and then you can send it back to us, and we'll score it, and we'll get it back to you. Okay, you've got your test in front of you, and we've scored them and written the scores on top. And what you have when you took the test is you have what you are, right, and the number of the score of what you are.

So let's find out. How many people here are, and what I'd like to do, I'd like to actually count this. So the first thing we're finding out is extrovert and introvert. Okay, so how many people were extroverts? Can you keep your hands up?

We'll get a count. Your first letter is an E. 22. And how many people were introverts? The rest. Well, 22 is 44% roughly.

Okay, so in this class we'll say that 45% were extroverts and 55% introvertsverts, roughly. And let's do sensor, intuitor. On your sheet, the intuitor is N because I is already taken up by introvert. So how many people are sensors? How many people have an S as the second letter?

Just raise your hand, keep it up nice and high. So a total of 18% sensors, and that makes, let's see, 18% sensors and what percent, what does that make intuitors? That makes 82, thank you very much. The intuitors helped me out with that. You would have helped us out if we had more detail.

Okay. Next is thinker or feeler. Who's the, let's see, how many people are thinkers? Keep those, put those hands down. Thank you.

Put the hands down. How many people are feelers? That'll be easier. So 46, I'll say 45%, 45% feelers, 55% thinkers. Okay, and then we're going to do judger and perceiver.

What percentage of, how many people are judgers? Got a J as your last letter. Okay, that's 28% judgers, and that leaves us with 72% perceivers. Now let's talk about what this means. Since the standard, or typically in the United States, the introverts are 25% of the population, but we have 55% of the population represented here by them.

Actually, these figures are pretty, by the way, these figures are pretty much common in every NLP training that we do. Typically, we have a more balanced population of introvert-extrovert than the rest of the U.S., so we find that we have a few more introverts than normal. Typically, pretty much the same as sensor and tutor. And this is pretty balanced as to the U.S., isn't it? Pretty much.

Very close. Because five points is nothing. And judge or perceiver, but this is, because judge or perceiver is 50-50. So this is pretty high. And I personally find that this is pretty typical for us for NLP trainings, these percentages.

But now we have to find out who is the person with the highest score. Oh, yeah, we want to know who according to the number on your page. Well, I'm going to ask. You ready? Okay, so the question is, who is the biggest extrovert in the room?

Anybody have more than 31? 31 extrovert wants 31. An extrovert is too shy to... Ian, what's your number, buddy? 43. All right, Ian. Give him a hand, Ian.

Well, you can introduce us all. Tell me about it, Ian. Hi, Ted. How you doing? Great.

How's it going? Really good. What did you do last night? Did you hang around with a bunch of people? Yeah, I did, actually.

Well, I was sitting there having a really quiet night, and just a whole lot of people just come up there and started talking. We went on and on, and we were talking in the band, and yeah, just on and on all night. Thank you, Ian. Typical extrovert. Okay, who is the most introverted person in the room?

Actually, the most introverted person is not here. But the most introverted person in the room is whom? Anybody have more than a 45? 45 once? Susan. We're going to come over here quietly now, Susan.

Okay. Hi, Susan. How are you doing? Fine, thank you. Last night I watched the sunset by myself until somebody came up and it disturbed me, so I left.

That's brilliant. Carl Jung strikes again. From the grave, he reaches out and says, you're going to be like this and I know it. Fabulous. Okay,.

Let's see. We don't have many sensors in the room, so we'll have to take what we get. By the way, what was your number, Susan? 45. 55 is way up there. 45 is not on the cusp. You're definitely in there or out there. Ian or Susan, you're definitely...

Okay. Sensors. So who's got the highest sensor score? Actually, the truth is, I gotta be honest with you guys, not a lot of 65 sensors make it to this training. You know?

Is there anybody that's got, anybody in the room got over 15 sensor? Top salespeople here. Anybody got any... Okay, who's the highest sensor? 37. 37 once. Matthew, let me ask you a question.

Are you getting enough detail in this training? Plenty. You are? Oh, good. Just wanted to make sure.

Yeah, I want to make sure you had enough detail. Yeah, plenty. Enough facts. Heaps. Good, okay, good, good.

Just checking. Wanted to make sure. Okay, good. So we're chunked down enough. All right.

Excellent. How about the intuitors now? You guys are way up there. Who is the highest intuitor we want to know? 45. 45. Whoa. 47. 49. 49, 49.

There's a tie here. 49. Son, what's the big picture? Oh, it's expansive. What's the big picture, Linda? Huge.

Okay, great. Are you getting enough big picture? Are you getting enough relationships between ideas in this training? You are. Okay, good.

Just wanted to make sure. Great. Okay. Thinker, feeler, right. Who is the most logical, reasonable, rational person in the room?

Who's got the highest thinker score? 45. Anybody higher than 45? 45, 45. 45 once. 45 twice. Linda, I need to just ask you a simple question. Are we, is this training organized logically enough for you? It's not.

Not, not possible. There's, there's too much airy-fairy, huggy, touchy-feely stuff going on. Yeah, sorry. Okay. Okay.

Let's find out how the number one feeler feels about that. Who is the number one feeler in the room? What do we got here? People are going, I'm not going to raise my hand this time. I'm just going to come over with a mic. 37, 37.

Joe's got a 37 feeler. 37 feeler. 37 once? Twice? Joe? I'm not getting enough hugs. You're not?

No, no. Rebel's going to... Got to have more. Got to have more hugs. More hugs, okay.

More hugs, yeah. Okay, will you guys remember that for Joe? Joe, he's going to handle that. By the way, is there enough airy-fairy weird stuff that goes on in this training room? It's close.

It's pretty cool. Not quite. It's pretty cool. Good, that means we're treading a safe middle ground here. I'm pleased.

Because if the biggest thinker and the biggest feeler aren't satisfied, hopefully it means we're in the middle and able to satisfy both realms. Okay, judge your perceiver. Let's see, the perceiver, we'll get the number one perceiver here, but we'll wait on that because the number one perceiver, we don't need to proceed for him or her. There's no hurry. For the number one perceiver.

In fact, for the number one perceiver, we could put it off. In fact, they would rather just because there could be someone else who might have a higher score than they do later on. But for the number one judger, you know we're going to have to get to the point. You know, get with it. Now's the time.

Who's the number one judger? What do you got? What do you got? What do you got? 29. 45. Whoa.

Okay. Joel, let me ask you a question. Yeah. How's it going? Pretty good.

Is this, have we laid this out orderly and sequentially enough for you? Not sequentially enough. No. Not with a 45-judger. Have we started on time enough for you?

No. No? I knew that. And do you want a schedule? Yeah.

Do you have a list? I do have a list, but I rarely follow it. Does that tell you anything? Okay, now he needs closure. Yeah, well, you know, Joel, there's a right way and a wrong way to do everything, right?

You write this down. Okay, and who's the 72 perceiver? Let's find out. The 72%, who's the highest perceiver in the room? 72% of the people who are perceivers. You might be up there.

Paula might be up there. Paula, what's your number? 40? 40 what? 49. You got her beat. 59. Whoa, wait a minute. 59. Well, you guys are off the Richter scale here.

So, we don't have to. How did they get here? Somebody from the back yells, how did you guys get here? How did you get here? I'm not sure.

You're not sure? No. You're not sure. It just sort of... It kind of happened.

It just kind of happened. When you got here, that's just... Actually, that's right. It just sort of happened. It just did happen.

You didn't make a decision or anything? I kind of flowed with it. You went with the flow? Yeah. That's a typical perceiver, especially at your number.

We've got to find out what's... Son, what's up? How did you... I got here because I put it in my timeline. After that, there was no choice.

Everything that goes in my timeline just falls into place. Oh, good. I just sort of floated here. You just sort of flowed here once you got in your timeline. That's great.

Paula, I just have to ask you a question. Paula, how did you get here? How did I get here? Yeah, I mean... It seemed like a good idea, and I decided to get here.

And I knew I could never be late for any of the sessions. Yeah? So it was okay. Have you been? Never.

Right on time, though. The last second, right? All right, excellent. By the way, what's interesting is, what's interesting is to look at the, I mean, because you guys have all been together now for more than a week, is to look at these people and notice, you know, how they are with making decisions, if you talk to them at all, or how they are with being extrovert, like Ian said he wanted a quiet night, so he ended up spending it with a bunch of people. You know, I mean, so interestingly, most, it's really bizarre, but our highest people really end up exemplifying what we suggested about how they should act.

So, yes. So now, how many people were, I'm not going to say accurate. How many people, let's see, did everyone get, were you correct when you elicited your extrovert-introvert? Yeah? Let's say how many people were off on your own elicitation of extrovert-introvert?

Okay. The question I would like to ask is, would someone else have elicited us better than we? Do you think? I don't know. Okay, so how many people were off on your elicitation of whether you were a censor or an intuitor?

A fewer number. Those of you who were off on elicitation of introvert, extrovert, were you introverts and you elicited yourself as extrovert? No, not necessarily? Okay. How many people were off on thinker and feeler?

Anybody off on thinker and feeler? Okay. And how many people were off on judger, perceiver? Okay, so you were shocked. Murray, why were you shocked?

For Murray to be shocked, that's good. Well, my timeline is very through time, you know, right out here in front of me. Oh, well, you're a nine perceiver, though. Yeah, it's not very far, but I mean, I'm just surprised that I scored perceiver at all. As a nine perceiver, though, the Myers-Briggs would say you're on the cusp.

You could end up 15 judger this afternoon. Or did you take it in the context of business? Yeah. You did. You took it in context of business.

Okay. How did you answer the question of when you go to do something, do you plan ahead or do you just kind of go? Well, that's a contextual thing for me. It depends on what it is. Mostly business.

Some things I will plan for, but it's not that much. Yeah, right. So being a nine perceiver on the Myers-Briggs, what I want to point out to you is that you could go all the way up to 15 and still be what Myers-Briggs calls on the cusp. I get it. So yeah, I don't plan all that much, but I'll sort of take a quick look at something and go, well, okay.

And I can flow one way or the other, I guess, easily enough. Right, right, right. So what I want to point out is that the way you guys raised your hands, our assistants counted in the back with the numbers, we're at approximately 85% or 90% accuracy in relationship to what you predicted. But as I predicted when I said one question, remember that Myers-Briggs uses 21. So, and those of you who were, now, was there anybody who predicted it wrong who was more than 15 away from your prediction?

So you predicted it incorrectly, and you were more than 15 points on the other side. Raise your hand if that's the case. That's 85%, right? Roughly. 85%, yeah. So in one question, you're going to get that amount of accuracy, and you're going to get as close as you can.

Obviously, if you could give the person a Myers-Briggs, you might get a little closer than that. But it is highly contextual. Did you all notice that on the weekend, if you took it in terms of business, you noticed that on the weekend you might have a totally different test score? That's what I was going to point out. I took this test two months ago, and in relation to my life in general, it's much different than when I take it thinking about my career, because I shift a whole other mindset.

Yeah. Right. So we suggested you took it in a context, and we suggested the context that you use it for is a context that you're going to be here for. So, perfectly appropriate. Lauren, what are you doing sitting Closer to the front.

I don't understand. I got a chance at it. Everybody was out of here this morning. Whoa. Okay.

Something happened during the board break, must be. Yeah. I had a question. I judge myself. There we go.

You judge yourself. I'm thinking I'm very much a perceiver from my timeline, and as I think about it, very in time. I only got a number one, and part of it is I have to make lists. If I don't, I'll forget where I'm going or what I'm doing. Exactly.

So how do the lists relate to my timeline? So you judge yourself as a perceiver. And it's interesting you would use that word. It sure is. It's really interesting that you would use that word.

But I really feel like I'm very in time, and so if I didn't make lists, I would never get anything done or forget where I was. Right. So you're probably an in-time person who has learned how to be less of an in-time person through the process of making lists and being a judger. So you've managed, let's say, to overcome the negative parts of being a perceiver or an in-time person. Okay.

So you've learned to overcome the problem parts of being an in-time person or a perceiver. Yeah. So in this case, it would be compensation rather than who I was underneath all of that. Did you take this in a business context? Or what context did you remember?

I took it in relationship, but most of those things didn't apply to relationships, so I wasn't here when they gave the original assignment, and I didn't know you had to choose business or something like that. You didn't have to. We said it was better to take a context. High relationships. I don't make lists for relationships.

You don't? Okay, where's our high judges? Who are high judges? Do you guys make a list for relationships? Do you make a list in your relationship?

Joel? No, you don't. Okay. So, what would you make a list of? All the positive attributes.

Really? I mean, after all. Matthew's going, yeah. Yeah. Matthew gets it.

He gets it. He totally understands. You do? Oh, no. I was told to do this when I got divorced, so this was a counselor who said, the next time you'll understand what it is you want before you get into a relationship and just get involved in the emotions of it.

So I did make a list. Did you really? Well, then you denied it, of course. That's great. Okay, look.

So the one perceiver, you could be in time and a one perceiver if you'd learned how to compensate. And if the question struck you, like, for example, do you make lists, et cetera, because some of those questions are like that, then you're the kind of person who has an in-time timeline, but you've learned how to get along in the world and compensate for that, and so you've managed to overcome some of the negative attributes of being a perceiver. But not totally. I said you have to learn how if you want to live in this world. I don't live in Hawaii.

David says who says that. The perceivers are getting grumpy now. Negative attributes of being a perceiver? There are some. Like showing up late for life.

By the way, been there personally and done that. I skim in at the last minute. Skim in at the last minute. So you've learned how to compensate. Excellent.

All right, so what fun. So the fact is that, and by the way, this is interesting. Myers-Briggs says that this is all cast in stone. Not from an NLP point of view, of course we don't believe that, but Myers-Briggs essentially would say that you're born this way and that very, very, I mean, you might have a swing of 15 from one side to the other, but it's something you can't change. Let's talk briefly how to change now all the Myers-Briggs patterns and how, this is NLP, and since you already know how to do I mean you already know how to do an LP I'm just going to mention to you what the intervention might be in case you're interested this is the end of tape 19 side B