# Changing Values In Hierarchie (Demo)

Okay, next thing we might do is to look and see what we might do as an intervention. So I would like to demonstrate two possible interventions, which we're going to do. And we're going to have to ask Sun to come back up on the stage. And Sun, please give Sun a hand. Thanks for coming, Sun.

And Sun had some revelations in the middle of the night, which probably are as uncomfortable as what Matthew experienced, so that's good. To me, it's like, to me, when a client calls me up and says, oh my God, I just realized something terrible, I go, all right. Because when you realize something like that, then you can begin to make some change. So son, what what did you realize last night in the middle of thinking about or maybe not thinking about all of this? Some was in the night.

One was in the night. It wasn't a big thing, but it was a little thing. This one was a little one, but I think it could be relevant. The paid well was a big one because so I'm not in debt because I have massive debt. So that actually was.

So that's more than 60% away from. I think so. What would you say it is? 90. So we'll change that to 90% away from. So that was kind of like, I mean, that changes it, but that wasn't the one that really like just...

One of them sort of freaked you out. Yeah. What was that? The success. This is when I was like sort of went into this altered state.

I was like power walking and thinking about these things. That's number eight on the list here. Yeah, so it's down there. But I was just sort of running through it. It's like success, well, why is that so important?

And it's so important because I don't want to fail. That's really important. And then I said I would rather die than fail. Cool. So that's more than 45.

It feels like more than 45% to me. Yeah. What would it be? Oh, it's totally away. Totally away.

Whoa. So that's 100%. Yeah. Excellent. That's really good.

That's fabulous. It makes my hands sweat, though, to say that. I mean, and it just blurred it out. It was like I would rather die. It was like it spit out.

That's great, son. That's great. Because until you discover how it is at the unconscious level, how are we going to make change? And I know somebody who died. My father, I would say he chose to die rather than fail what he thought was failing.

That's fabulous. Because I went, what a weird thing. And I went, that's who did that. That's fabulous. That's excellent.

That's really exquisite. I'd like to work on that first if we could. I'd like to demonstrate a number of interventions. And I think what I'd like to do, let's see, is I'd like to do the intervention on success. Oh, there was one more.

Oh, okay. I don't think it's that big of a deal, but again, it's just... Yeah, no, tell me. I want to hear it. The fun and joy that bothered me yesterday, because I just kept thinking, well, so I worked in jobs that weren't all that fun, but it didn't seem to be that compelling.

But then I realized, it's like the words just came out, I was brought up in this joyless household. And that seemed to have more of a grip than just, somehow that just didn't seem like that big of a deal. I don't know if it is. Okay, so what would be the percentage if you were to re-evaluate that one? Well, 80 is coming out.

This, by the way, see, we saw Sun totally congruent yesterday in terms of these percentages, and this is why one of the things is that you might want to meet with a client over more than one day, especially when doing a personal breakthrough session or using NLP for the purpose of enhancing performance. And in this case, what we see is we see that Sun had a chance to think about it, her unconscious mind, and what happened is, on slide 151, is the unconscious mind got to light up more neural networks as she thought about it, and probably Sun had to do some internal processing about it, too. Well, because yesterday it just didn't seem, seemed unsettled, but I didn't know why. It was like, oh. Yeah, well, now you know.

Now I know. Okay, this is fabulous. Okay, so here's what I'd like to do. I'd like to demonstrate, let's see, oh, and fun and joy, okay. What I'd like to do is, I'd like to demonstrate timeline therapy as an intervention for letting go of away froms.

Now, admittedly, those of you listening to these tapes have not yet studied any timeline therapy, but this is a place where we would use a timeline therapy intervention. So I'd like to demonstrate that. And what I want to say is that the timeline therapy master practitioner training tape set, the black tape set, is quite vital in this regard for learning timeline therapy. So much of what I do may not be obvious unless you have a background or understand what timeline therapy is about or how to do it. For those of you who are here, I assure you that when we get into our timeline therapy section, that we'll unpack and explain all of those things that we're about to do.

Okay, son. My heart's racing. And you're gripping the chair. I am. You're gripping the chair.

It's okay. You can grip the chair. We don't provide seat belts, so you may want to hold on. So let me fall out. Yeah, you won't.

You'll be all right. Okay, so success. And you've noticed that there's a real big away from. and the issue for success is you'd rather die than fail, and you're not the person that first did that. Now, as I talk to her, I'm lighting up the neural networks, right? So you're not the person who first actually did that or who first talked about that.

He didn't talk about it, but he did. It's your dad. Your dad did it. He died. He died at 42 because he thought that he wasn't a success and he really I mean I think that he was but he it was never enough and that's that's the other never enough that's the other big thing that came oh cool right I don't think anybody else in the class can relate to that that's the other that's the other thing it for me is that nothing that I do is ever enough.

I can have a hundred, what are those called, feedback sheets saying fabulous, fabulous, fabulous, fabulous, and I will still say all the things that could have done better. Once in a while, it's like, yeah, I did a good job. Excellent. This is great. What a great opportunity.

Because a lot of you think I'm just working on Sun. And of course, if we were to ask Carl Jung or perhaps even Carl Prebram, they would say that we're at some level of the universe, we're all one, neurologically. Okay, Sun, so your neural nets are lit up. I can see that. Aren't they?

You're in it. You're right in it. Okay, son, so we're going to do timeline therapy. First of all, it's a demonstration, and you have a timeline. I know you know that, and you've done timeline therapy before, but just for elicitation's sake, where's your past and where's your future, if you knew your past would be...

My future's right that way. Whoa. And my past... Sun is pointing off and to her right. And her past, she's pointing behind her.

To the left. And it's off to her left, behind her. And you've floated above your timeline before. Have you not? Yeah.

All right. So let me ask you a question. The first time that this issue of success became an issue, and from what we know, you've already told me that it was an issue for your father. So what I want to ask you is, what's the source of this issue of success or the sort of decision that I'd rather die than fail? What's the source of that, the root cause of which, if we disconnected it, would allow that to disappear as an issue for you, if you were to know?

When was that first event where that decision was made? Was it before, during, or after your birth? Before. It was before. And was it in the womb or before?

Before. Before. So assuming that it was before that, was it in past life or genealogical? Passed down to you genealogically or from a past life? Genealogical.

Genealogical. And how many generations back does it go? Of course, we knew it was genealogical already, didn't we? But I wanted to demonstrate the process because she talked about her father. So how far back in your family does that go?

One, I think. One generation. Is that one generation before your father or just your father? I think my father? Just your father.

Okay. Excellent. Okay, son, so would you please, if you would, just go ahead and float, trusting your unconscious mind, and just go ahead and float right up above your timeline. And what I'd like you to do is to float back into the past. Just float right back into the past.

And what I'd like you to do is go back to that event where your father decided that he'd rather die than fail. And I'd like you to, just so we can gather some information about the negative emotions present, would you go back to that event and float right down into the event? And just sort of, when you're there, you can tell me. And what I want you to do is just get in touch with the emotions that are there and the decision. So we're going to float right back down into position number four.

That's not real comfortable, is it? Do you have a sense of what the emotions are that are present? Sun is actually sort of grimacing as we notice that perhaps she's floating down into the event. It's a fear and anger. Fear and anger.

Okay, good, Sun. Come right back up out of there. And what I'd like you to do is go back to position three. So you're above the event and before the event, well before any of the events that led to that event. So you're above the event and before the event, and you're well before any of the events, even before the events that led to it.

And as you turn and look toward now, the question is, now where are those emotions? Son's smiling. Little chuckle. Where did they go? I'm not sure.

I didn't think they'd go that far. They went more quickly than you thought. Okay, so the decision that was there, I'd rather die than fail, where did that go? It disappeared, didn't it? Yeah, I wasn't even aware of it when I was down there.

Let's go back inside and make sure it's totally gone. Okay. So why don't you float down into the event once again. Float right down into position four. The sun's smiling now.

It's fine, huh? It's flat. Flat. Excellent, excellent. It's flat.

My heart's doing just a little thing, though. Well, what's that about? Something about uncertainty. Uncertainty about? About what's going to happen in life.

Perfect. Remember what I said on the first day? About if you're not investing enough? Well, let's put it this way. If you're not uncertain about what's going to happen, you may not be investing enough.

Okay. If I could suggest some learnings. Okay. Does that work for you? Yeah.

Great. Why don't you float back up to position three? Okay. And, son, what I'd like to ask you to do is I'd like you to come back above your timeline, all the way along your father's timeline. Come back above your timeline and make sure you let go of any other negative emotions that are related to the issue of success, as well as to allow all the events between then and now to reevaluate themselves in such a way that as you come back to now, your success only becomes more assured.

And I'd like you to notice at least three events in the past where you could have been totally successful and felt as though you could have been totally successful. Me or him? Well, him while you're coming back up above his timeline and then you when you're coming onto your timeline. And notice at least three events where you could have been totally successful and the issue of failure wasn't even an issue, that it was totally something that you could conceive of your success and really feel good about it. And do that, if you would, all the way back to now.

You can tell me when you're back to now. Sun is going through some physiological shifts which we can see here. Shift in color and breathing. Shift in shoulder movement. Her shoulders are moving back and forth.

She's sitting up straighter now than she was. And there's a smile. The corners of her lips are upturned in the position of smiling. Are you back at now? I'm really close.

Okay. I'm back. Okay. Good. Please float down and then now come on back in the room.

Whoa. That's how I always have to come back. Yeah, right. All right, welcome back. That was good.

Good job. It went rather quickly, didn't it? Okay. Now, what Sun and I want to do right now is we want to have a little discussion, such that it gives your unconscious mind time to integrate the changes that we've just made without mentioning them. So I might say, I might be inclined to say something like, you smell popcorn?

No, but I smelled toast earlier. You smelled toast earlier, yeah. That was your negative emotions, actually. They're toast. They're gone.

They're gone. Well, here we are in Kona. Nice view, huh? Yeah. It's sunny today, too.

Looking towards the light. Yeah. Sunny today. All right, Sun. So let's look at your values hierarchy here.

What's up with that number eight value there? What's up with the issue of success? What's up with it? Yeah, and I'm not concerned right now about the relative relationship of it in the hierarchy. Just as you think of success, what comes up for you?

Warmth. Warmth? So you're feeling that inside. That's different from what you were feeling last night. This morning.

Well, last night and much different from what you're feeling this morning. Yes. So as you go inside and ask your unconscious mind, was there, is there any away from that's left on that value? Or is it toward? I think it's toward.

You think it's toward or it is toward? Well, it is toward. I just thought it would be a little bit more difficult than that. Well, son, it is more difficult than this. In fact, what we'd like you to do is when we're done is to jog around the hotel a hundred times.

I can do that. I know you can. And then do a hundred push-ups, only to have it be... I'm not sure about that. Just kidding.

People say to me all the time, it shouldn't be this difficult. I mean, it's easy. It shouldn't be. And I agree, it shouldn't be. But it is.

And we've had to apologize for that before. Okay, son. So just for fun, just for fun, let me, I have a different color pen here. If you, as you look at this, as you look, and we're not going to make any other shifts, but they may have, other values may have changed. We're not going to do anything yet about that.

I just want to ask her, what's the relative, as you look at, as you look at success, is that the right place for it? No. No. That's congruent. Where should it be, then?

My eyes go to three. Three, okay. My head was saying four. Four, okay. Well, let's just say that something happened here.

We'll cross off that number so we know that something happened there. Can I say something? You've got a microphone. One other thing that I realized is that, and not totally on my own, I have to admit that there's a tall Finnish person who we were talking, and I realized, because I'm fiercely, I guard my, guard my independence fiercely, fiercely. Fiercely.

I mean, I got married and left for three months to go travel on my own. It doesn't, you know, make a lot of sense. So that happens, and I have a lot of fun. Yeah. And I'm real curious.

Yeah. And yet, you know, actually, I've been successful. I just, you know, hadn't recognized it. But, like, this is really down there. Being paid well is down there.

Yeah. We were going to talk about that today, you and I. Okay. But I just wanted to say that it was pretty interesting where those fell because... Does that make sense?

Yes, it does. And it makes sense, and it's something we're going to talk about shortly. But hold on for that, okay? Hold on for that thought just a moment. I also want to check and see if, because this intervention looked like it might have been closely tied into other things, so I want to see if there's any change in the issue of fun and joy in your life.

And when you think of that value, you knew last night that there was 50% away from, you knew as we just working here today, that it was 80% away from. As you think of it right now, is there anything away from in that particular value? A little bit. Good. Good, good.

Okay, good. But not like it was at all. That's great. That's perfect. So, here's what I'd like you to do.

What I'd like you to do is I'd like you to pick a spot on the wall to look at. What I'd like you to do as you do that is just to allow your awareness to expand out into the peripheral. Got that? Then I'd like you to consider fun and joy as what's important to you about that. And think about what is important to me?

Yeah, think about fun and joy as a value in your career. And notice if there's any shift in what you think about that. And what I'm doing as she's doing that is I'm standing here with my hand, moving it back and forth in her peripheral vision. And almost immediately when she went into the peripheral vision, Hakala state, and considered fun and joy, she got a smile on her face. Now the question, son, is tell me when the away from component totally disappeared.

It's gone. It's gone, okay. All right. Now, by the way, that looked rather simple, and the truth is that it was, but what I'd like to suggest is that the issue of success, with regards to it being a family or genealogical issue, probably would have been best cleared up using timeline therapy, from my point of view. But that once we'd handle any genealogical issue or anything like that, that it's going to be rather simple for us to do this using peripheral vision so that we bring that whole thing into alignment.

So fun and joy is... Son, you look a little spaced. Very good. You're right in the right place. Okay, so we have just one more to look at, and that's the issue of your compensation or being paid well.

So as you look at that now, what is the percentage of away from? Last night you said it was 60%. Right now, as we started this intervention, you said it was 90%. When you think of it right now, what percentage is the issue of paid well in terms of away from? The sun is sort of looking quizzically at her, values hierarchy and wondering.

Well, something's happening here. Perfect. But I don't know. I'm kind of speechless. Excellent.

Why don't you pick a spot on the wall to focus on? And just go ahead and as you pick that spot on the wall to focus on, just sort of allow your awareness to expand out in the peripheral. And then consider the value, the importance that you have of being paid well. Son's smiling already. And just stay in that state until whatever you knew was as the what was the away from component has disappeared.

One of the questions, by the way, that you may have to ask the client as you do this, if you're just using the Hakalau or peripheral vision as an intervention, is how do you know that that's an away from now? You may have to ask that specifically. We haven't had to ask that with Sun just yet, but if she doesn't access that immediately, we may have to ask that as a question. And then Sun, when the away from is totally gone, you can just sort of come back. It's gone.

Yeah. I just don't know what it was. Yeah, that's fine. So now, before you let go of both of those sets of away froms, I'd like to ask your unconscious mind to preserve whatever learnings there may have been necessary for you to get from this or whatever you needed to learn from this in such a way that will allow you in the future to be moving toward what you want in a way which is elegant and really positive that preserves your independence, that preserves your fun and joy and your curiosity and anticipation. Good.

All right. Now, Sun, what we're going to do next is we're going to see if our interventions have made any difference to the hierarchy. And we're going to do that on wall chart number 21. So those of you listening on the tapes could turn to wall chart number 21. And, Sun, what we're going to find out now is what the order and sequence of these values should be, what they ought to be in terms of the ranking of them.

And we'll see if our prediction made any difference to see if the order and sequence of the values has actually changed without us doing a direct intervention into the values themselves. So, what's in the context of your career? What if I, what if, like, I'm going to change a number? No, no, I don't want, I know you're going to, I know you want to change a number of them. What I'd like you to do is look at where they are right now.

Oh, okay. And with simply those two interventions, because then what we'll do is we'll look at if we should change anything after that. And if they have changed, that's fine. But you need to tell me what they are right now not what you'd like oh right but what they really are right in this minute so what's the number one value as you look at all of these values wait let me just do this let me take these numbers that were here and do that and we're looking at wall chart number 21. So you want me to tell you?

What they are now, yeah. Well, I don't think Fun and Joy are there. Okay. Well, what's the most important value? Results or curiosity?

Results. Results. Okay. What's the number two value? I don't know.

Sun is actually integrating while we talk to her. So, okay, Sun, what's the number two value as you get a little perspective on this? That I really love what I do. Okay. Oh, you want three?

Please. That I'm paid well. Uh-huh. That I'm creative. Creative, uh-huh.

That I'm curious. See, I would think success should be important. However, if I'm getting the results, then I'm successful. Oh, so success is a subset of results then? It seems to be.

Okay. I mean, if I'm getting results. I'll just sort of throw that in there like that. So results slash success. Mm-hmm.

Uh-huh. That I'm challenged. That you're challenged. Is that what you said? Yeah.

Okay, number six. I'm always connecting with people, so I don't think that needs to be there. I don't. Okay. So you're going to do that anyway?

Yeah. Okay. What's next? Well, fun and joy, that's like a part of who I am. So I don't think that that needs to be there.

Okay. I don't think independent needs to be there. Okay. Because I am. So.

What we're left with is? Satisfaction. And satisfaction, as long as I'm getting results and I'm successful, I'm really satisfied. So six for learning and growth. Seven?

Oh, seven. Seven for learning and growth. And then satisfaction could be, I mean, satisfaction is important, but I believe that as I'm successful and I get results, I'm absolutely satisfied and fulfilled. So would it be results, success, satisfaction? Well, not one, two, three.

No, but as part of... Oh, yeah, yeah. So it could be results, which includes success and satisfaction. Okay. And as I get results and I'm successful and satisfied and fulfilled, then I also have the respect.

So that's just... So that's part of that, too. Okay. Funny it ended up being in there, too. Okay.

So what do we have left, then? Connect with people. These are all givens, and so that's the order and sequence of your values. So it would be results, that you really love what you do, that you're paid well. Excuse me.

It would be results, which includes success and satisfaction. And when you've got that, you've got respect. And then it would be you really love what you do, that you're paid well, that you're creative, that you have curiosity and anticipation, and a challenge, and learning and growth. I might just switch these, because as I'm curious, it makes me more... Oh, wait.

Yeah, I just switched those. It doesn't really matter. You would switch those, or you have switched them? I guess I am switching them. Or have switched them.

Well, let's find out. So you wanted to switch which one, curiosity, anticipation? Yeah, because as I'm curious and as I'm anticipating what's going to happen, that creates the creativity. So I have to be curious and anticipate first before the creativity really kicks in there. Okay, so let's find out.

Okay. So if, so we'll find out. So if you could have, so I just want to know, I want to know what they are right now, not what you're going to do in a moment. So if, yeah, so what we're looking for is where you're at right now. We haven't, we haven't not, we have not done an intervention into the order and sequence of the hierarchy yet directly, have we?

We've done indirect interventions, which is to take away away froms, and we may do a parts integration. I hope I can demonstrate one with regards to a values change. But where we're at right now is, so right now is being creative number four and curiosity and anticipation number five? Great, okay. You say you may want to switch those.

That would be fine. We'll show you how to do that. Okay. But that's the way they are right now. is the ordering sequence right feels like that yeah great this is the end of tape 26 side a What we're going to demonstrate next is how to shift the values in a hierarchy because Sun has identified something that she'd like to do. And we've gotten to this point, and this is the point where we would actually make a shift in the values hierarchy.

Once we've done the cleanup, we've handled the away froms. Oh, a couple questions that we might ask ourselves. One of the questions we might ask ourselves is why was success so low on the values hierarchy? Why did it shift upward when we got rid of the away from component of it? Essentially what she had was her whole life looked at her dad and had an image of success of that.

When we let go of the limiting decision and the negative emotions that were around that, what it allowed success to be was her own, let's say, definition of it. So surprisingly, success moved up in the hierarchy, which is perfect, because then it sort of aligned itself or became part of the issue of results and also satisfaction, which brings respect. So notice also that for Sun, that having a significant or really high away from component in these cases kept the values or kept her focusing on the negative, which kept them at a lower level. This is, I think, also predictable with regards to compensation or money or income in that a client who moves strongly away from a role model when we get rid of the, in terms of what the effect was on the person's life, is going to have money or compensation or income be lower on the values hierarchy than when they let go of them. Okay, so what I'd like to do next is to simply, what we're going to do now is demonstrate the shift of the curiosity and anticipation so that it is more important than being creative.

Okay? Because Sun said that she wanted to shift that. All right? So that's what we're going to do. So Sun, when you think of, in your values hierarchy right now, when you think of the issue of being paid well, so what we're doing, what are we doing?

Well, let me just stop for a moment. And what we're doing is slide 149, or in your notebook, page 327. And let's use 327 as an example. What we're going to do for sun is we're going to find the submodalities of the higher level value that we want to move the lower level value up below. Then we're going to shift the submodalities of the lower level value to very close to those of the higher level value and notice where it settles out.

Okay, that's, that's exactly what we're going to do. So we're going to do a submodality shift. In order to change values in a hierarchy, you don't need to, to do that, you don't, you don't need to, you don't need to do it all at once. That is to say, you don't need to elicit all of the relative values of the submodalities of all the relative values. You don't need to find out which submodalities end up causing the values to be in a hierarchy.

You only simply need to elicit the higher level value that you want to move the next, the lower level value up underneath. And so, since she wants to move number five to just below number three, we're going to elicit number three, right? And then what that'll do is it'll end up moving number five to number three. Okay? We'll just do that.

This'll take but a moment. So, Sun, in the context of your career, when you think of being paid well, do you have a picture? And that picture represents the value or the importance of being paid well, does it not? Is that in black and white or color? Color.

Is it near or far? Out in the middle of the room. In the middle of the room, okay. It's very big. Very big.

And do you see yourself in the picture? I kind of flip back and forth. I see both. I'm in the picture, I'm out of the picture, and I'm in the picture, I'm out of the picture. So when you're out of the picture, are you looking through your own eyes?

When I'm out of the picture? Yeah. In other words, are you flipping back and forth between associated and disassociated? Yes. Okay.

Is it a movie or still? It's a movie. Is it bright or dim? It's bright. Actually, it's not that bright.

No, it's kind of a beam? Okay. Can you clear the screen? Great. What I'd like you to do is to go ahead and get that picture up on the screen and have it be the picture which represents for you the importance of curiosity and anticipation, the value of curiosity and anticipation in the context of your career.

Make sure it's that one. Yeah? And what I'd like you to do is to make it the same color as the previous picture of being paid well. Have it be in the middle of the room, but just a little farther out. Like, just a little farther out.

Okay? And have it be back and forth between associated and dissociated. And have it a movie and have it be of medium brightness. Okay, and then you know the sound that Tupperware makes when it seals. Sun's nodding yes all the time, by the way.

You know the sound Tupperware makes when it seals, right? Just lock it right in there. Great. Then go ahead and clear the screen. All right.

Welcome back. Nice day. It's so much nicer than this morning. It's terrible. Well, you had a great revelation.

I'm so much in favor of great revelations. Me too. I'm not going to tell you that I'm sorry that you had a great revelation. Good, good. Okay, let's see.

So when you look at these values, which is more important to you, curiosity and anticipation or being creative? Curiosity. Oh, so curiosity is more important than being creative. So would you, as we were to re-look at them one more time, then would you say that curiosity is number four, being creative is number five. Let's just see.

Can you actually go through and tell me what's the number one value in that hierarchy there? Results. Okay, good. That can do it. What's two?

Really loving what I do. What's three? To look. Oh, being paid well. Yeah.

Do you want me to not look? No. Oh, okay. And what's four? Curiosity.

Good. What's five? Creative. Great. Great.

Being challenged and learning. Excellent. So for me, that looks pretty congruent. What I would do is give her another day. Since I knew that she had something shake out in the overnight, if I were doing a personal breakthrough session, I'd schedule some time with her tomorrow just to make sure that these values, that there were no other revelations that she needed to have or anything like that.

But what we now have is a hierarchy that's more to her liking. And actually, since, I mean, I hesitate to say this, but since we're all done, since results is one of my high values, I'm not displeased with the outcome. But I hope I didn't have anything to do with the process of it getting there. All right, thank you, Sun. Please give her a hand.

Thank you. Good job. All right. Let's take some questions on what we just saw. I noticed when you did the submodality change, you only used the visual submodalities, and I know there's a reason, but I'm asking what it was.

The reason was, and probably when you do this yourself, with clients, the first few times you are there any, are there any sounds that are important or any feelings that are important? I'm sort of a minimalist. I have to admit. And I like to get stuff done as quickly as possible. So if I had shifted the values and the values had not changed relatively in the hierarchy, then I would have gone back and gathered more information.

That would have been interesting. I only used the visuals because I felt like the values were going to be, I felt like the hierarchy was going to be visual. And I, I intuitively felt like, it's funny I'm using kinesthetic to describe that. I intuitively felt like that distance was the thing that was going to make it, was some, I felt like distance was what was going to make it more important or less important. So I had to put it a little bit further out, and that seemed to do the trick.

Distance or location, up to down, those two are often major ways that we hierarchy stuff. Since values are generally a VK synesthesia, I felt like I didn't need to worry about auditory kinesthetic. But I have had clients with whom I did have to, but being the minimalist that I am, I didn't elicit any more than I needed to. And if I got to see, NLP is so, I mean, the way we do these things, it's so quick that, so what, if you don't get it the first time, you go back and elicit more information, and you do it, you get it the second time, right? Okay, other questions about what we just saw?

On one of Sun's values, you use the Hakalau intervention, and you, I guess, target it for part of her awareness on that value, and for that intervention, don't you have the chance of actually blowing it all out? Yes. Okay. Was that your purpose? No.

Oh, okay. And I thought we would do what we did and notice what we noticed. In fact, as I look at the hierarchy, I think that'll produce better results for her. And the truth is... Sun's over there smiling.

The truth is that you do run the risk of blowing out all the away-froms, which would be interesting. Depending on how you do it, it's possible that you could blow out all the away-froms. It's possible you could certainly change the values, the toward values and their relative importance to the point where they were either unconsciously accepted. See, what Sun said with some of the values that shifted out was she said, that's who I am. So they shifted from being in the context of her career to the context of her being.

So some of the values expanded the context, which is, I think, going to have her be more clear in her own mind about what she wants. So with the peripheral vision intervention, you do run the risk of context, which is why you probably ought to be, you probably ought to look at what you're doing as you do it and make sure that you've contextualized it tightly and know that it will probably go outside of context anyway. Okay, other questions? Yes. That's who I am.

Does that mean anything that we feel that's who we are does not need to be in the values? No, it doesn't. If it came up, if the client says it as part of the values, then it's part of the values, regardless of what comment they make. So what you're doing is you're taking her experience and making it yours. And what I would say is just look at each client individually and don't make a generalization if you've elicited one client's values and they say, that's who I am.

A lot of times the way values work is if a client feels that something's handled, it's not going to be part of what's important to them. To put it another way, if you really feel like you've got this as a given, it may not be part of your values hierarchy. Now, it may really be part of your values hierarchy, but you may not mention it in a single intervention. That doesn't seem to make, that doesn't seem to, it doesn't seem to reduce the effectiveness of the intervention. What Sun's going to find out from this values hierarchy here is that she's probably going to get quite a bit better results, be more successful, and make a lot more money, and really enjoy it.

I think that's probably what you'll find out from this particular values hierarchy. And a lot of things, a lot of, some of the things that she had where they were away from, by the way, each of those things that dropped out of her hierarchy had also some away from component, which may have had a higher away from component than she was aware of consciously. So when those dropped out, like to me, for example, if I could analyze a little bit, the issue of independence has got to have an away from component to it, which is at least a percentage higher than what she said, which was a little bit. To me, the word independence implies that there's got to be some away from component. Because independence from what?

To me, what's the comparative? So independence from something. So what happened with that value was that the away from component disappeared. And probably that's more beneficial to her anyway because if independence is not an issue, then she's going to be focusing on more important things. So anyway, if a client says that's who I am, it doesn't mean that the words don't have to be in the hierarchy.

You have to ask the client and calibrate on what the client tells you. So I wouldn't make any hard, fast rule about that. Other questions? Hi, Laura, how are you? I'm in transition.

So what I used on the last exercise to elicit my motivation driver was rejection. And when we redid the values list, that's my number one value. And what I heard you say is you've never changed a client's number one value. Directly. And that's my goal.

So tell me the secret. Directly. Directly. So we're going to do it indirectly. Yeah, indirectly means...

See, I wouldn't go in and do a submodalities intervention on your value. I wouldn't do... I wouldn't go in and do a direct intervention on your number one value. But if we got rid of the... If your number one value was primarily away from and we got rid of the away froms and then your number one value changed, that would be fine with me.

So if we got rid of all the away froms, your number one value probably would not be your number one value. Because it would either disappear or rearrange. It would disappear or rearrange, right. Cool. Or, or the positive or greater context, greater contextual expression of that value, that is, the same expression of that value in a bigger context, might become more important, or might be important.

More positive, not necessarily. Also more positive if we take, also totally positive, or more positive if we take out the away froms, right? Excuse me, I'm in an altered state. Yes, you are in Hawaii, and you're doing just fine. When you perform your intervention, do you usually get the type of integration where success means results and respect means results, whereas you don't get an integration with creativity and results?

Do you usually? No, there's no usual. You just have to look and see what the client says. Every time you do an intervention with a client, it will be different. There's no way that you can take one experience and generalize it to all clients.

Every time I've done a values intervention, it has been different. As we'll see in just a bit, because we want to go over some additional values. I want to demonstrate some additional of intervention. But every time you do a values intervention, my experience is it'll be different. And so there's no hard and fast rule we can say that this happens, that this happens.

Sun groups success, satisfaction, and therefore respect as subsets of results, which to my way of thinking is possible to do. And just because creative didn't go in there doesn't mean that there's anything wrong, it just didn't. And that she wanted to shift curiosity and anticipation, that's fine, because curiosity and anticipation was a little bit higher before, and then it sort of dropped down, which is also possible when you take out an away-from component. You were wondering if there was something you missed. There was nothing you missed, and there's no rule of thumb that we can make from what we just saw in terms of what they will normally do.

That was just me eliciting what happened to her when we went back afterward and found out where they all settled out. Of course, we did have a major shift in our hierarchy, didn't we? Yes. Patrick? We did.

Changing creativity and curiosity. If there was bigger spread, would there have been anything you would have done different? Like if curiosity was way down the ladder and she wanted to bring it up to like third or something? No, the intervention I demonstrated is exactly what I would do, exactly what I have done every time I've shifted values in the hierarchy using submodality shift. Okay.

Yeah. Thank you. I mean, that is the way to do it, exactly as we did it. Regardless of the shift, you simply elicit the higher level value. So I elicited, in this case, I elicited number three for her, as you remember, and we got the submodalities of number three, and then we changed the submodalities of number five into the number three, backing off one of them, which I felt was the driver, or one of the drivers.

So I backed it off slightly. Well, actually I did, didn't I? I backed it off. I mean, I did more than just backing it off. I backed it off from her.

And then... Right? Okay. And then it ended up being number four. Even if we were going to shift it to number one, I would have elicited number one, changed it to the $7 number one, and then backed off one of the drivers, or what I felt was a driver.

Okay, Linda. Yes, in the exercise, when she said that those were her qualities of herself. In the demonstration, you mean? In the demonstration. Yeah.

When you think of the six areas, they encompass a personality, so would there be a hierarchy of your being that is even higher than these six areas, and that it transcends all the others, kind of, sort of? Well, of course, there probably is higher level than this, even. The psychology of the ancient Hawaiians talked about something more than the unconscious mind and the conscious mind, which we call higher self or higher conscious mind. And it's possible that, and yes, it's possible that there's a higher level of self. The issue for me is that with regards to RNLP interventions, we need to get to a sufficient level of specificity.

So the temptation is to go to the bigger level and handle it all there because you want to shortcut the time. The problem is if you don't handle it specifically enough, then the issues that generated the problems won't be resolved. So in many ways you need to get specific enough so that the intervention lights up the neural networks and that the client themselves, that we have enough specificity to make the change in the given area. Well, it starts to seem, what we're just hearing now, that if we're working in the specific areas of how we're dealing with life outside, which is business, relationship, family, spirituality, all of the six areas, then there starts to be an integration of who we, in a sense, we are consciously, that this is bringing the conscious awareness of who we are, and that we can sometimes get of some of these, like we make a list of 20 and it comes down to 10 because we've integrated those parts are really part of other parts already. So being specific in those areas brings more unity of our conscious knowledge of the qualities that are already there, the values that are already there and that they're integrated.

So I would resist if I were you the temptation to collapse all your values into one, which I think is what you're leading to. I would resist that temptation because, in essence, that would be the way for someone who is enlightened, and you might find that all motivation disappears. That's one of the interventions I did with a guy, remember, who earlier I told you wanted to be enlightened. We did collapse all of his values into one, and he did lose all motivation to work for about six months. So if you do that with a client, the results may be unpredictable.

I would say that you probably ought to stay specific enough when you're doing this so as to hold the context, so as to stay inside the context that you're working with, will give you predictable results. And so my caveat to you is as follows. If a client comes to you for a business problem and then quits his job and goes to India and meditates for the next 20 years, you will not get a lot of clients for business problems. And the results for the client may also be unpredictable. Now, if the client comes to you and says, I want to be enlightened, then I think that's appropriate.

Now, whether or not we've done the right thing for the client is a different issue. Whether or not this is what the client should have had is a different issue. But I don't know that I have a right to say, oh, you're not enlightened and you should be, therefore I'm going to blow all context for you without telling you. I think that would be inappropriate. Because you may not get the learnings that you need to get interimly.

So if you get the present state, remember our little diagram on page 5-1, if you get the present state, and then you find that the client chunks up to a bigger context during the intervention, that is demonstrative of an inductive process of change having occurred. Okay, that demonstrates that the neurological, remember we talked the first day about neurological boundaries? That demonstrates that the neurological boundaries which were present on the condition of the problem, that we've actually gone beyond those. All I'm saying is that if, because Linda, where you're leading toward is let's blow it all out and see if we can talk from it. I was actually thinking how beautiful this gently puts the person into more congruencies and puts the parts more together, and then that way that they get a more sense of self consciously for a change, and then can take it to all the areas of their life, because for me, I'm starting to see that as the totality, you are taking yourself to all these different areas.

Exactly. Good. Good. That's what I hoped you would see. And so my only caution would be, because some folks like to think about, like, where could we go?

Unless the client really asks you specifically for an intervention of that magnitude, I think it would be inappropriate to, and you could discuss it with the client as to where you might go, but I think it would be inappropriate without telling the client to take them beyond the contexts or much farther than the context which you began with. Yeah. But you could just see... For me, my lights are just going off in my head about all the connections from now and maybe six months, a year, two years later that's just going to be like, it's just a Christmas tree that keeps lighting up. Yes, yes.

And that is what we talk about when we talk about generative change. Yeah. That's the difference between, what you just saw is the difference between remedial change. Right. Where a client comes in, they're broken, then they get fixed.

To generative change, where there are things where the client's growth opens up and where they continue to grow. So the client doesn't just come in for a problem that's solved. The client comes in and some changes occur in that process which continue to generalize and continue to make a lot of difference in the client's life. Yeah, we're actually, I'm going to be talking about this in just a few tapes, but we're going to get there because we're almost to a point where we're going to talk this afternoon about NLP and healing as we sort of complete our Mastery of Practitioner training. But with reference to the process of Hakala, Sun saying, that's who I am, is actually typical of the response of someone who's picked up a higher level of truth by going into the state of expanded awareness or peripheral vision.

That's a reasonably common response. And what it is is that she's actually gone to the level of... Remember the bottom of the bubble diagram, which is slide number 107? What she's actually done is gone to that area that knows only truth, slide number 107, which is at the bottom left. So what's happened is we've used her neurological drivers, or we've used her getting in contact with the whole of her neurology, or awareness or dropping into the void, which then got her to the area which knows only truth, so she picked up some truths and then really got that that's who she was or is, so it's not an issue, thus having changed the context.

Yep? Okay. So that's a demonstration of handling away froms. That's a demonstration of noticing what happens when we work with some away froms. This is the end of Tape 26, Side B.