# Interventions In Values,Motivation Changes After An Intervention

Next question, Brian. All right. During that, you had just mentioned that you had asked in the question what's important to you about living. And I was wondering when would you ask that question in illicit values about what I perceive to be a bigger chunk of living rather than career, relationships, spirituality, family, health and fitness? I began to elicit values in the context in which they were going to appear when I realized personally that the values elicitations that we were doing or that we had done were too broad-based to be useful contextually.

So look at slide number 150. One of the major things about NLP that we do is we contextualize the change. So there are a lot of values tests and a lot of values, especially the Rokic values test, for example, if you're familiar with that or if you've studied psychology, that just simply ask broad-based values in life. The problem with that is, from an NLP point of view, is we want to contextualize the change more specifically so that it affects that area of life. So when we elicit career values, for example, we know we're going to make a difference in the client's career.

We may also make a difference in the client's relationship or health and fitness or personal growth and development. But generally, when we do an NLP intervention, we hope that we have sufficiently contextualized the operation that we do so that it's only in that area. Because typically, that's how people come to us with problems. They come to us with a certain problem that's contextualized in a certain area. One of the interesting things is that people often have, for example, skills in one area that they're not applying to another area.

So we certainly can bring things across contextually. For example, someone in family might have an ability to relate to younger people which they might not have in their career. Or vice versa. Right? So then it's a matter of grabbing those resources from somewhere else and pulling them across.

However, the problem with big context interventions is often the results are unpredictable. So with this guy who changed his friends, hung out with different people, we did an intervention in the area of health and fitness, but I asked him what's important to you about living? Which, by the way, was not, at least in terms of my intention, it was not my intention to get his life's values. It was only my intention to get his values about what's important to him about living as opposed to dying. And when he said, when I elicited those values, he said, I'm afraid I'm going to die.

And I said, good, so what's important to you about living? And I would suggest that you elicit the question of what's important to you about living any time you're doing an intervention where part of what's at stake is the client's life. So if you're doing an intervention for, for example, a client that wants to improve their health and fitness or reduce their blood pressure or in any life-threatening dis-ease, if you're doing sort of an alternative intervention, then I think you probably ought to ask the question, what's important to you about living? And it was, I think, interesting that we changed, what did we change for this guy? We changed his relationships, we changed his health and fitness.

We changed a number of things in terms of importance in his life. Probably, if time were the judge, we probably would have also changed, may have changed some things in career, especially if the boss said to him, you know, you're going to have to work late tonight. And if he had exercise as a higher value than career, he might have said, no, I really need to work out. For example, and by the way, weight loss is something that I'm really, or being healthy is something I think that I've gotten to be reasonably clear about, at least in my own life, for the first time in a number of years. And I think this is just an aside, but it has to do with values.

To me, one of the things that I had to do, and I don't know if you guys know this, but recently I lost about 30 pounds on purpose. And it had to do with a shift in diet and also working out regularly. And to me, the best health program is one you do every day, not three days a week and not four days a week. And if you want to see how that is, hold up seven fingers just for fun and look at your seven fingers and ask yourself how many days a week are you going to miss exercising? So let's say you say I want to miss two, something's going to come up two days a week anyway.

So let's say you're going to miss two days, how many days is left? Five. Okay, now hold up what most people do which is is either three or four fingers, and let's hold up four fingers to give everyone the benefit of the doubt. Then you miss two days of exercise a week. How many do you have left?

Two. Now the problem with two is when you get down to two, you go, maybe I won't work out today, I'll work out tomorrow. And then what happens is you're down to one, and then what happens is you blow off the schedule. I want you to know I've done that since 1975, and for me that doesn't work, so now what I do is I plan my day around exercising. That actually makes a major difference.

Now if you can make exercise that important to yourself, somehow, and do we know how to do this? Yes we do. Because we now know how to shift values in the hierarchy. If you can make exercise that important to you, then what will happen, and doing it legitimately, then you can work out or you can exercise seven days a week, and then what you have is light days and heavy days. And then if you miss a day, rather than going, oh no, I missed a day, what do you say?

All right, I get a day off. That's really cool. So at least that's my own personal experience. So what I had to do to do that was to shift exercise up so that it is a major primary value. And to be honest with you, I'll get up real early to make sure I exercise.

Like in San Diego, the class started at 10 o'clock. I was out rollerblading at 6.30 one morning until I realized I could rollerblade where I was and then I got up at 7.30. But nevertheless, I think that is, for me, that was a shift in values in terms of moving it up in terms of importance. You can do that with almost anything. So we're back to answering your question, Brian.

Why not elicit just life's values? My experience personally is that life's values are so broad-based and so cross-contextual as to not have the precision that we need to make a major change in the context that we're working on. So typically I would tend to look at that area. Because typically, and where I began doing this was clients would come to me, and what I began doing when I completed my NLP training and also in the research that began timeline therapy was the first thing I did was begin doing what I call personal breakthrough sessions. And a personal breakthrough session is a five hour session where the client comes to me and what we do is we assist them in breaking through whatever's limiting them in their career.

So when, if we were to change values, if we were to change the values in the whole of the person's life, what would happen is probably that, well, first of all, we may get changes which were unpredictable, which were not precise enough. But the other thing is that, for me, we need to get a sufficient level of specificity so as to be able to intervene in the area that we're working on. Here's another example. If you look at slide number 151, from a quantum physics point of view, I think it's instructional to look at the body like a Christmas tree. And the activated neural networks, which is a term that comes from Dr.

Paul Goodwin, the activated neural networks are like lights strung on the Christmas tree. Now, the thing is, if a set of neural networks is not lit up, from a quantum physics and physiology point of view, if a set of neural networks is not lit up, we're not going to make the change in the activated neural networks. In other words, in order to make a change in a set of neural networks, they have to be activated. Okay? So if we're too broad-based, the specific set of neural nets that relate to that behavior may not be lit up.

In timeline therapy, one of the things we say is it's awfully hard to pull a set of lights off the tree that aren't, that have never been lit up in the client's memory or that the memory or that are not lit up currently that the client doesn't know about. Like, for example, a client comes to you and says, in timeline therapy, a client comes to you and says, I have angry outbursts. You say to the client, well, or no, a client comes to you and says, I yell at people. And you in your mind say, oh, the client has angry outbursts. And you say to the client, well, do you have any anger?

And the client says, no. By the way, I've had clients like that. So the client says, I yell at people. You say, do you have anger? The client says, no.

That client may not have the neural networks of anger lit up. So there is a specific intervention in timeline therapy for that, which is essentially we take the client back into the past and have them go into the event and experience the anger, just briefly, so we can light up the neural nets. And then he comes, he or she comes back out and the anger disappears. So, in the same way, when we're working with, when we're working with values, if we go too broad based, we may not have the The firing, the sequence, actually, of the neural nets may not light themselves, or the sequencing of the neural nets may not light themselves up sufficiently to allow for change to be specific enough in that area that we're looking for. So we go with a specific part of the neurology, or we go with a specific part of the person's life in one of those six values areas.

Does that answer your question? Yes, thank you. Good. Let's see. There are other questions.

We're taking questions now about the hierarchy you just elicited or elicitation values. Yes. Once you move the value to the new number two position, this is a two-part question, does it then make the former number two, three, and four become three, four, and five, and if so, are they now less compelling? Yes. And yes.

They are. So 2 becomes 3, 3 becomes 4, 4 becomes 5, and they are less compelling. Depending on how far they are, how far down they are in the hierarchy. They aren't that less compelling. Well, let's say that...

I mean, to go from formally a 2 to now being a 3 doesn't seem like it would be that great a change. But at the same time, you did say that making it number 2 was very powerful. Yeah, number 2 is a real powerful shift. Let's say that a client that moves from, for example, a value that moves from 3 to 4 could be quite a shift for a client. That's going to move the number 4 value to number 5.

So since they were formerly quite compelling, they probably will keep their compellingness, but something else will just come in and be a little more important. I think that's the best way to put it. Okay. Other questions about what we just did? So you all have...

Okay, here's another one over here. Good for you. Three of them were a shock. Three of them were a shock. Yeah, the sentence that says, if you had all these, what would cause you to leave?

Well, the answer for three of them was death. No, that's pretty final. But that comes up in my life quite often. I'm wondering if... By the way, I figure for me, the way for all of us is there's no way out.

That's going to say it. Are there some considerations there I need to look at? You tell me. Let's ask your unconscious mind. If the client were to say that to me, that would be my response.

So what do you say? Well, first of all, let's see what the... I mean, what's the context, first of all? Personal growth? So what would stop you from doing personal growth is death.

Now that being present, is there anything that would cause you to continue? I had to ask. I had to ask. I'm really sorry, man. I had to ask.

Show her she had an answer. What was the answer? I like it. Reincarnation. Reincarnation.

Excellent. Okay. Same thing over here. Very good. That's good, Susan. that's good Susan that's good okay so Susan said she ended up that what came in was reincarnation and new beginnings and new possibilities and that was that was good so okay so so yeah it's possible I if that came up you know it's what that essentially says to me is you're going to continue to do personal growth and development for your entire life that's right I.

I don't think that's, I don't see any problems with that. Unless that was, unless the client, or unless you as a client, if you've dealt with major depression before in your past or something like that, then I would look at it. If that's all complete and it's clear, then it's not a problem. So, which is it? It's not a problem.

Not a problem. Great. Thank you. Yeah, so I don't think it's a problem. I mean, I think that's a good way to put it.

I mean, you know, like, hey, there's some things I'm going to do, and this is so important to me to grow, to grow and to expand and to continue to experience more of life, that I'm going to do it no matter what until... But that's good, Susan. I've got to talk to you. So that's good. So your thing was what?

What I was working on? Which area of my life? Yeah. It was personal growth and development. Oh, the same thing.

Right. And so what you decided was that if you reincarnated, then you'd have new beginnings. Well, the word reincarnation never sort of entered into my mind. It was the idea of what could be next, and that's just new possibilities. Good.

And it really helped me because it just blew out the whole idea of death. It just blew it out so that it's no longer an issue. Fabulous. That's good. That's good.

I would say that that is a major shift for you. That'll be good. That'll be good. Yes, Dad, if you're working with children and they're at the age of nine or ten, they pretty much set up their values. So could you elicit their values as clearly as you can with an adult?

Yes, you can. Kids have values, in spite of what some folks would have us believe. I mean, everyone has values, and the thing is to allow them to be the way they are. So don't have any value judgments. So if a child's constantly experiencing death, though, I mean, every time a problem comes up, well, I'll just die.

If I just die, it'll all be better. Isn't that a value that they're referring to? It could be. It could be a significant emotional experience. It could be a limiting decision.

In the context of doing a personal breakthrough session with a child like that, I think you'd, I think it would be better to, I mean personally, to look at what the alternatives are for him or her. It's probably just a limiting decision or some significant event in the past. It's probably not values, and we will get to that in timeline, when we get to talk about timeline therapy. But it is possible to elicit values for a child and, and find out what they are. Just don't expect them to be the same as yours.

And really allow them to be, because kids are very malleable. To put it another way, there's a very fine line between elicitation and installation. So if they think you're looking for something, they'll attempt to give it to you. So what I would recommend is that you be nonjudgmental about it, whatever values they come up with. You know, like if in relationships the value is having more toys, then that's fine.

Yeah? Even though you might not think that you like it. It could also be a manipulative strategy. Yeah. Could be, but still there's going to be a limiting decision there that is necessary to produce that kind of behavior, I think.

Anyway, we'll talk about that when we get to timeline therapy. Right? Okay, other questions about the hierarchies that you've elicited? Any other questions about the hierarchy you've elicited or the toward and away from's that you found when you did. Yes, sir.

Actually, my question is about what is hallucination and what's real? Sometimes it's very difficult in terms of values. What are the values that I really have versus what are the ones that I want? And it's a very fine line. I get hard times putting some words on the right side of that line.

Well, so there are values that we want. There are values that we want, and there are values that we wish we had. And I think the more you get to know your unconscious mind, the easier it will be, of course, to come up with these. On the other hand, the problem is the more you know about values, the more your values change. Isn't that true?

I mean, the more you learn about values, the more, the easier it is to sort of adopt other models of values. For example, in the Claire Graves system, which is the values test you took. In that system, the first time you get to a point where you can actually begin to look at other models or other, other systems of values is values level seven. So at that point, when you get to values level seven, according to Claire Graves, you can then begin to look at other ways of thinking, other ways of being, other value systems, and you can even adopt them if necessary, and understand each of those values levels. So I think since we're talking, since we're getting to the point where we're about to make some changes in values, because here, oh, so the theory that we're about to, let's talk a little theory first.

Anytime we make any intervention into this values hierarchy, for example, if you look at Sun's values on wall chart number 20. Any intervention that we're about to do with regards to anything with this values hierarchy has the potential of changing the relative, the, the values relative to each other. So that means essentially if we intervene into any of the away from's using timeline therapy or any other intervention that will allow the away-froms to be let go of, then what will happen is it's possible that those values will change in terms of their relative importance. Anytime we do a parts integration, it's possible that the values will change in terms of their relative importance to each other, especially if we're doing a parts intervention which is in the middle of or involved in any values hierarchy. So any parts integration has the potential of changing values relative to the context in which it appears.

So I just want to tell you about that in advance because we'll probably find that some of the things that we do are going to change the relative level of the values in the hierarchy. Linda. That was such a good question, that last question, that my thought came to me that when you're working with someone and they're telling you their values, but in their mind they're thinking of values that they want to have in that area. Now, if they give those to you, wouldn't that be also the power to put them in their life for them? The problem is if a client gives you values they wish they had, they may not be the values they have, so you may not actually light up the networks, the neural nets, of the values as they really are.

So you have to encourage a client to give you the values that they really have right now. Not the ones they had in the past, not the ones they want for the future, not the ones they had in their old job, not the ones they want for their new job, but the ones they have right now if it's a career. You get a sense of that then as you're working with them and during the interview process and getting to know them, you might get a sense that... You get a sense whether or not, like for example, like for example, if someone says, yeah, money really should be number two. And you go, so you hear the word should, you go, okay, well, is it really number two or is it not number two?

So what is it right now? Well, I'd like to make, the client will say, and I've had a lot of clients say this, well, I'd like to make more money, therefore it should be number two. But what is it now? Yeah? And so one of the, I mean, like one of the things me, when I've done values intervention with people, especially in a personal breakthrough session, is if you find a client, it's really funny.

Some clients who aren't making enough money will come to you and compensation or prosperity or money is absolutely nowhere in their values hierarchy. Nowhere. What you do is just turn the values hierarchy around to them and say, what's missing? And they go, well, money. So I say, so you do this job even if you didn't get compensated?

And they say yes. No, really. They say yes. So that's valuable to learn if you're working with someone. That's very valuable to learn.

So the theory we're going to start with here is that any intervention into the values hierarchy could make a difference in the hierarchy itself. Any intervention that we do, such as timeline therapy, if we're working on a values hierarchy, getting rid of away froms, or parts integration, or any other intervention that deals with the hierarchy or deals with clearing up conflicts or something underneath it, anything like that has the potential for changing the values in the hierarchy. There's a caveat here. It's okay to do interventions, but if you're dealing with values hierarchies and if the client has a significant number of away froms, I'm going to say this twice because this is like the whole crux of doing an intervention with values. If you do an intervention into the hierarchy and the client has a significant number of away froms and you take those away, the client has the potential of losing motivation in that area.

So for example, a client that has a significant number of away froms in his or her career, if you assist the client in getting rid of the away-froms, the client may find that they're not motivated. The client may end up without motivation. Now, the truth is the same thing can happen even without your intervention. Just a caveat, a warning, so I'll say it again. If you do an intervention into a client's hierarchy, especially if the client has a significant number of away froms, and you get rid of those away froms, as we're about to show you how to do, then if you don't go back and re-look at the hierarchy, the client may actually have a reduction in motivation.

That is entirely possible. Yes, Deborah. Where would the idea of, you said before, I think yesterday or the day before, that we could change the motivation of away from to towards. We're going to do that. I'm going to show you how to do that.

And that's what I'm talking about. What I'm talking about is paying attention to and make sure you do that, what I'm about to mention. Okay, so that's next. Susan. I had a value that was a number two value pretty high up there that no longer is a value.

I mean, once I dealt with this death thing. I love it. Right? Yeah. Then safety didn't become an issue, so it just disappeared completely.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So? So that just means that it literally is lifted out, put somewhere else, and the hierarchy just moves back up? This happens in life, yes. Well, did it?

So you have to ask yourself that question. Where did it go, and what's the effect of it? It just disappeared, and I kind of laughed about it because it just blew out into this peripheral vision. What's the context? Personal growth.

Personal growth. Personal growth. So in the context of personal growth, safety is no longer an issue. No, it's just a given. Yeah.

So it's not important at this point? It doesn't even enter into the picture because it's there. Oh, it's automatically there. It's just automatically there. I didn't really think about it.

I know that... So one of the theories of values is that values are also what's unfulfilled in our life, even if they're toward or away from. I have to admit that's real. That's moving in a little bit into esotericism. But why would Zen Buddhism say the way is for he who has no preferences?

So that's cool. In fact, it's possible that that change, and of course, Susan, one of the things you mentioned was it blew out into peripheral vision, which is one of the other techniques we're going to talk about for assisting clients and letting go of away froms. And we're going to get there momentarily, but we have to do a few more things. But we're on our way. We're on our way, and the wheels are rolling, the car's in gear, and we're taking questions.

In regard to values on my career, my top value is compatibility with belief. What does that mean? It means that I can't do something that I don't believe in. Oh. Okay, that's an away from.

Yeah. Cool. But aren't beliefs tied to a value? Yes. So would I need to chunk higher to get...

No, no, you're fine. We'll see what happens to that when we do our... Okay. Do you have a few away froms in your hierarchy? Nine out of ten.

Nine out of ten? So, before you were saying don't... Well, there's an issue to remember about moving too many away froms. I want them away. You want to get rid of them?

Yeah, I do. Yeah. Well, my prediction is that we can do that. Good. Yeah, my prediction is that something will change.

And no, I wasn't saying don't get rid of too many away froms. What I was saying was if you get rid of away froms, you need to know that there's a possibility that the values in the hierarchy will change themselves relative to each other. And if you don't pay attention to the relative level of the values, you have the possibility of a client losing motivation. I'm not saying don't change the away froms. Because personally, and I think this is an important concept, and I have to say this is our little branch of NLP.

This is not true in all areas of NLP. But my point of view is that towards motivation is much better than away from motivation. Because, first of all, in order to move away from something, you must focus on what you you don't want which means that you're oftentimes going to get it and the second thing is is when you when you finish making things so that they're not too bad then the motivation disappears anyway right which is what which is what makes which is what makes away from performance so inconsistent well that's what i feel with my career because i get to a point where I've moved away enough from what I don't want and that's why I stay there and I'm still unhappy. Fabulous. Good.

So with 9 out of 10 away froms in your career, then do you see how you're doing that? It's perfect, huh? I mean, what a great evaluation for yourself. Yeah, it was incredibly hard. I hated it.

I absolutely feel horrible. I went back to the room last night and said, don't dare ask me a question about NLP tonight. Great. Good thing I didn't call you. Let me ask you about NLP.

Absolutely. Matthew, you're laughing about it today, so that's good. You're in the right place. Okay, so that's good. So we'll have some fun with that.

We'll see what happens. The prediction is it's possible to get rid of all the away froms from the hierarchy. And there's two primary ways to do that, which we want to look at. And we also want to look at what the effects of a parts integration might be on a values hierarchy. And then we want to do some interventions.

Then we'll actually want to do some interventions. So let's take a moment and look and see what the next thing we might do is. And page 324, the five tests for values alignment, essentially is going to give us an idea of what we might do to align and make sure that a values hierarchy was appropriately ordered and sequenced, et cetera, so that it was in, let's say, the right, and I don't mean to have any value judgment there, but it was in the right order, and that we're aware of possible away froms, we're aware of possible toward conflicts, we're aware of toward away conflicts, we're aware of away from, awayfrom conflicts, and we're also, we've looked at the logical level of abstraction and the syntax. That's where we are, right? That's where we are right now.

The next thing we need to do, then, is to look and see what we might do as an intervention. This is the end of tape 25, side B. Thank you.