# Eliciting Metaprograms

Okay, let's move on to the convincer. Convincer is how do you know that someone else is good at what they do, and then how often does someone have to prove competency to you before you're convinced. So let's see if we can get a range of people here. I just wanted to backtrack. If you're in this industry where you work with clients, isn't their satisfaction important more so than if you're looking at a company where the whole thing...

Lauren's leveraging values here. I don't know what we're... What's up? Well, I was just thinking, if you're working one-on-one with clients... Making a value judgment about what Ian just said?

No, no, I was just thinking for myself. It would seem that even though I tend to be internally referenced, that their opinion suddenly becomes a lot more important than if I were running a company. The individual clients might not be as important. Yeah. I think that all of these metaprograms are going to be contextual, and the way you answer them in business is going to depend on the job that you're in at the moment.

Okay. Okay, so let's see. So how do you know that someone else is good at what they do? They have to do it every time. They have to do it?

They have to show me every time. So let's say that you were working with someone and they made a sale, but you wouldn't know they were any good. So, like, if you were managing me and we had a training coming up and we had done eight years of great trainings, you'd say, but I don't know what you're going to do this time. Yeah. Yeah.

It's going to grow. Mitch has got it. It's going to grow. In a business that I owned, an auto body repair shop, I had guys that were so talented, but I had to check them every time. Because it was like, I don't feel like doing this today.

And I'd go by and there'd be a gazillion mistakes. How many is that, Mitch? Is it gazillion? Is that more than three? It's more than I can handle.

When the customer shows up. When the customer shows up, yeah, I hear you. It's all external. I can feel really good about it. And the customer walks up and says, here's the money, gets in the car and never looks at it.

And he had a bill for six grand that took us three months. And, you know, he's got to show me every time. Okay. All right. Excellent.

Okay. Okay. Okay. Who else? Son?

Yes. How do you know someone else is good at what they do? I've got to see him do it. And how often does someone have to prove competency to you before you're convinced? A few times.

Like three? Three, yeah. Okay, so after that you'd know? Yeah, I'd know. Okay.

I might recheck that I'd know. You'd know. Yeah. Okay, okay. Yvonne, how often does someone have to prove competency to you before you're convinced?

Oh, well, how do you know someone else is good at what they do? Let's start with that. I have to see them do it and have a good feeling about the way they've done it. Then I'm convinced they can do what they can do. But then every time I see them, I have to get that feeling.

So I'm in every time. Every time you have to get the feeling. Wow. Okay. So what is that?

It's consistent, isn't it? I usually also get a sensing that somebody's doing something well. How do you get that sensing? It just feels right inside. You feel it, okay.

You feel it. I feel it. You feel it after you... After I've experienced what they're doing. Do you have to do it with them, or can you just see them do it?

No, I could listen to a seminar, or I could watch them, you know, their children or family or whatever. Okay, that's good. So you heard me just make sure that we got the correct rep system down for Susan. Okay. And then usually it's once.

Once. So one time. One time, and then after that you'd know they were good. Yeah. Great.

Good. So I think we've got, oh, we don't have a period of time yet. Who's got a? Okay, David. So let's find out.

So how often do, I mean, So how do you know someone else is good at what they do? Well, I'm basically either automatic or first time, but then I go back if I do continue to use them and check periodically what they're doing to make sure that they're consistent. Okay, but you accept it after the first time. Is there anyone who's not convinced for a period of time? No one, okay.

Well, so someone who's not convinced for a period of time might say three months. Three months. This is also, by the way, in addition to being business, is also useful in relationships. No, this is really useful in relationships. Is the question, this answers the question of, by the way, guys, this answers the question of how often do you have to send your flowers?

Every time. That's the answer. Every time. Every time. I can only answer for myself.

Personally. Okay. Let's see. Oh, yeah. Management direction is next.

Management direction is next. So there's three parts to management direction. Right? There's three parts to management direction. Let's go back to Mitch.

Let's go back to Mitch and get his three parts to management direction. You ready? So, yeah, we're on page 3-5. So, Mitch, do you know what you need to do to be a success on a given job or a given project? In the job that I have now, yes, I do.

Do you know what someone else needs to do? Yes. The same thing I have to do. It's very consistent. It's a government job.

We're not allowed to be anything other than employees. There's no room for creativity. That's what they want. So do you find it easy to tell a person you're working with that that's what they need to do? Oh, yeah.

Because I'm aware of it, because I don't do it. Okay, so don't be creative, just do the job. Right, that's it. Okay. Good.

All right, so what is that? Self and others. Right, very simple. Self and others. Let's see if we can get an example.

Is anyone self-only? Whoa, no one's self-only. Is anyone others only? Your sister is? She doesn't know what she needs to do, but she can sure as hell tell you.

Okay, well let me give you some examples. So self only is I sure know what I need to do. Others, I don't know what they need to do and I don't care. Right? That's self only.

And then others only is, you know what you need to do to be a success? No, the boss tells me. And, yeah, there are people like that. Do you know what you need to be a success? You know, the boss tells me I only do what the boss says.

That's it. Yeah. And do you know what someone else needs to do? Oh, yeah. Sure.

And do you find it easy to tell them? Very easy. That's others only. And then the final one is self but not others. And I had to add this because even though it seems redundant, because this happened when all the people from the 70s and 80s started hitting the workforce.

And the question is, do you know what you need to do? Well, yes, I know what I need to do. Well, do you know what someone else needs to do? Well, yeah, sure, but who am I to tell them? Let them, you know, different strokes for different folks.

Let them be their own. So we added that for the more recent people entering the workforce. Okay, that's management. That's management direction. Action.

Yeah, this is proactive, reflective, or both. So let's see. So when you come into a given situation, do you usually act quickly after sizing it up, or do you do a complete study of all the consequences? A complete study of all the consequences. Quickly.

So you're proactive. Yeah, very proactive. Okay. Quickly. Quickly.

Yeah. So you're pretty quick. Yeah, walk in, sit, there's a problem, okay, this is what we need to do. Yeah, let's get it done. Okay, is there anyone, anyone has to do a complete study?

Let's see if we can get an answer. Oh, so you guys are all pretty quick. Oh, Joel, oh, Joel, okay. Okay, great. Okay, Joel, talk to me.

I'm just going to study everything. Everything. And then think about it some more before I can do anything. And make lists. How long does it take you to make a decision?

It depends on how big it is. I mean, if it's a simple decision, I just think about it. Okay, yeah, right. But if it's a big decision, I may not even make it until I have to make it. Okay, so in a given situation, you have to know everything about it.

I've got to know everything, weigh the possibilities, all the consequences, before I feel I'm in a position to actually decide. So that's pretty simple. That's reflective. Pretty simple. Yeah, active or reflective, and definitely he's reflective.

I'm a bit more impulsive and it's really interesting listening to you because if I go shopping with my husband we go through every single store for hours and he never buys anything because maybe there's a better deal around the corner. And I buy it before I even look at it. I buy it before I even look at it. Wait a minute. I like that.

That's exactly like me and my girlfriend. So we never go shopping because I've got to go through every single place to find exactly what I want. When we went and bought a bed, I had to look at every single store and every single bed, even though the second one was what I wanted and what we ended up buying. Good thing she was with you, huh? Okay, that's the action.

That's the action filter. You can ask, by the way, one question and get the affiliation and the work preference pretty much in the same question. So let's see. And the question is the same. Tell me about a work situation in which you were the happiest.

A one-time event. Rich, tell me about a work situation in which you were the happiest. When I was flying. Okay. Tell me about it.

It was a combination of independence and interdependence and fun and freedom and like that. Okay. So, did we get a lot of information just then? Yeah, we did. Well, first of all, do we think he's going to be independent management or team?

Team. I don't know. We'll see. We'll see. We'll talk about that.

The question is, is a seminar leader independent or team? Is an airplane pilot independent or team? Probably. We'll have to see. At best, he's going to be management.

At least, he'll be independent. He's probably... Things, people, or systems. He's probably not... People.

Because we didn't hear him say anything about, we did hear him say interdependence, but that could be systems. And we did hear, and probably things, so let's see. So tell me more. This, by the way, I just wanted to stop this in the middle and give you the thought process that I would go through as I heard that. So you're flying what?

What's up? Flying people different places and enjoying the process of flying and flying them. Staying in new places meeting new people and just enjoying it. Okay. Just because he's flying people places doesn't mean that's a team.

I still don't hear anything about team. Do you? No. But I do now hear about people. And I hear about, what else do you hear?

Places. Seeing new places. So we've got people and places. We may have systems, I don't know, but we definitely still have independent, don't we? Because I don't hear team.

It could still be management, but I don't hear that yet. Okay? So we'll ask some more questions. Do you like your plane? Yeah.

I have to. Okay, so tell me more. It's not why I don't like the plane. You have to like your plane. You have to like your plane.

You have to like your plane. Okay. So how important is the process of flying to you? It's a combination of creativity and freedom and technology, so it's important. So when he says technology, I'm going to vote for systems.

Probably. Okay, so one of the things you can do is we could ask questions forever, but notice what you hear and notice we've actually done the next three things here. But we can cross-check Rich by asking him about his favorite restaurant. So we can do a cross-check and see what we get and see if we're correct on our primary interest filter by simply asking, you know, so Rich, tell me about your favorite restaurant. Chinese.

Yeah? One from column A, one from column B. I love it. What is that? Systems.

Okay, why else do you like it? It's real social. You can share. What's that? People.

Get like five things with five people and you can split. Whoa, that's systems, isn't it? So I think we were pretty accurate on our intuition, right? Would you? Because when we cross-check it with that, we got people and systems.

That's pretty good. Activity. I might even vote for activity, but I'm not sure yet. And we can go on and ask more and more questions and get more and more information. We'll at least know what he's paying attention to.

Right? Okay. Yes, ma'am. When you ask about activity, is that personal involvement or just activity going on around you? It could be either, both.

But I didn't hear him say that the activity was the important part. I heard him say that the people were the important part. Even though there's lots going on, but it was going on with people. Some people who have a high need for act. So here's the deal.

If you hire somebody who has a high need for act, if you really want to hire somebody to get something done, hire somebody who has a high need for activity and put them in charge of something. Like typing all the stuff that hasn't been typed. Or sorting, putting all the stuff into files that haven't, hasn't been filed. Or, or sorting out different things and, and what, what'll happen is they'll get it done in a week and then they'll wonder what's next. You know, we, we, no, once, once, once at Advanced Neurodynamics we hired a, a, a front desk person who had activities or high, very, very high need.

And this was actually the one I told you about who said she didn't have a favorite restaurant because they were all too boring. So we asked her to like to, we had this horrendous, this was, we had this horrendous filing system. And we asked her to refile everything and she had it done in a week. And then she got so bored because there wasn't enough to do that she left us. But all of our stuff was cleaned up.

No, she said, there's nothing to do around here. When I first got here, there was lots to do, but now there's nothing to do. Isn't that great? So she went on, leaving her mark of having organized everything for us. Yeah?

Isn't this context-dependent, though? Everything is. Because, like, yeah. Duh. Okay.

Thanks for sharing, though. I appreciate it. No, all metaprograms are context-dependent. That's why we asked you to take this in a certain context. Okay.

Because my other job was mobile ophthalmic photography, in which case it was totally people-oriented, which I love, because of the people. So, two different contexts, two different feelings. But it's also systems, isn't it? Yeah. But my enjoyment was the people, is what I'm saying.

Yeah. Yeah, okay. Right. Now, I don't hear things from that. I hear systems.

Right. Okay. Now, if you find somebody, by the way, who has a high people need, don't put them in the back room running the computer. Or doing data entry, because they'll be out front talking to everybody in the office. It's true.

It's true. Or a better, you know, a people person, don't think they'll be back there doing it. Or a things person, don't put them at the front desk answering the phones and meeting people. Because they're not going to be interested in that. Okay, chunk size filter.

If we were going to do a project together, would you want to know the details first or the big picture first? Big picture. Totally big picture. Do you need the details? No, I really don't.

Okay. If we were going to do a project together, would you need to know that? Big picture first, definitely. Would you need to know the details? Some of them, later.

Later. Not right away. Definitely not. Okay. Good.

Okay. Ian. The big picture and the details just fall into place. Oh, that's good. So you don't really need to know the details.

They'll just fall into place. Yeah. Great. Yeah, they always do. They always do.

Always do. Wow. Okay. Okay. Anybody details first?

Joe, give me yours. Big picture, other people worry about the details. You have to hire the people that worry about the details. Some folks back there like that. Anybody details first?

Anybody details first? Okay, let's move on to the next one. Get your sheet out, if you would, or look at the three coins, either one. And the question is, what's the relationship between these three? Now, this is where it gets to be fun.

What's the relationship between these three coins or these three boxes? Okay, who's ready? Matthew. Same. They're all the same.

Oh, Lauren wants to know, are you serious? Yeah. They've got the same likenesses and the same differences. They're all the same coin and they're arranged differently. Okay.

Two are the same and one's facing the other way. One's different. So two are the same and one's different. Now, when she says two are the same, is she noticing the hole? Not necessarily.

So we may classify her all the way down to sameness and differences equally. We're going to come back now. So how long have you remained on your average job? Probably 18 months. 18 months. Yeah, not real long.

I have to keep doing different things. Right. So the answer you gave us was sameness and differences equally, probably. Because all you're doing is looking for poundage here, for the amount of stuff that comes through the hopper. So what you said was essentially sameness and differences equally.

Or... One statement that used to really confuse me when people used to say it's the same difference. It's actually a different sameness for you, right? It's like, hey, you know, it's either different or it's the same. Right.

Okay, let's go back to Lauren. So Lauren, how often do you remain on an average job? Well, there are circumstances, like once I moved to Germany. Sure, sure. And then I took a long time off to have my children, and then I was in one for three years, and I just started this one a year ago.

So it looks slow, but... So three years. So three years is the longest you've gone. Yeah. Right?

And what would we have classified her as? We would have classified her as differences and sameness equally at best because she said there's two and then there's one, which often tells us that she's looking for the differences first. And so we're about two years off on Lauren's job longevity. Who's next? Okay.

I'm kind of like a jack-of-all-trades. I've done everything. Have you? I don't last long with anything. I have to move on.

I move on. But you have to tell me, what's the relationship between these three boxes? I would say they're pretty similar in every respect, except for, well, you know, they're the same, but I can see an offset, so I don't know. It was a tough question for me, actually, to see which one it would go under. So, as you look at the three boxes...

I guess. I would say they're pretty similar. Pretty similar. Do you hear the word pretty similar, though? Yeah?

So, if they're pretty similar, what other relationships do you see? Well, like I said, when I look at them, I realize it's all the same coin, but there is a difference in one is set, but it's just a matter of point of view. I read too much into the question. And is that how you answered it when you did your test? That was the question I had to go back to once I finished the test and keep evaluating.

Okay, so what we want to find out now is why is he at 18 months when he seems to be so high for sameness? And the answer could be that, did you work for companies where they kept changing things on you? No. So there was no reason that you could... No, I just, I don't know, I just, it's just not what I wanted to do, I guess.

I don't want to stick with a company. I'd rather do my own thing. I work well with myself, not with a lot of people. Unless I can choose my, let's say, for example, if I can choose my team, that's great. So you were out of those companies for a different reason other than, you didn't work well with other people, so you have a high independence factor.

I don't think it's... I'd rather, if I had a choice, I'd rather work by myself. And I like to move on. I like dealing with new people. I don't like to stick with the same people for too long.

That's a good way of putting it. You like dealing with different people. Yeah, and I don't want to get stuck with the same crowd for a long time. That bores me a lot. which I'm in a case like that right now where I'm ready to move on because I'm down the people I work with. So notice that as we get more information, what we're hearing is more differences in his preference, in his preference style.

There's also an alternative question, which is what's the relationship between what you're doing right now and what you were doing a year ago? And in this case, especially when we get a mismatch between his job longevity and the way he answers a question, we need to go on and gather more information. Actually, the kind of work I do now, I think this is probably the longest I've ever been in when it comes to any job, but I really can't wait to get out of it. What's the relationship between what you were doing? How long have you been doing this?

This is going on pretty much for about three years now. Oh, three years? Yeah. Three years too long. So before that, what was the relationship, let's say, three to four years ago?

Oh, entirely different. There was no similarities at all. I mean... What was the relationship? So what you want to do is keep probing for a relationship question and notice if you can find the reason why it's different if it is.

So let's talk to Ian. Ian, what is the relationship between these three boxes? There's one different and two of the same. Okay. And what's the relationship between the three quarters you know they they are different they are different mm-hmm and what's been the average length of time that you spend on a job well before I started this business, I was doing consulting work, and I guess it may have been just a matter of months.

So you were on different jobs. Yes. And you typically would stay in a certain job for months. That's right. And how long have you been doing this one?

Seven years. Seven years, right. Okay, good. So what's going on for Ian is he's transitioning. So we hear that there's a transition there.

And he started off by giving differences first, which means that we would primarily predict his job longevity at three years, three years or less, since he gave us differences and then exceptions. And probably what will keep you doing this job is that there's enough change in it. Yeah, you're right. Is that important to you? There's enough change?

As you define your own job, how many times, as you define your own job in your own company, how many times has that changed for you? A lot. Yeah, I'm still going through that. So how many times have you redefined the company? Twice in the last seven years, and I'm going through a major one right now.

So you've redefined the company every... Three years, in fact. Three years. Yeah. Right, good.

So one of the things about somebody that works for themselves is that when it comes to prediction of job longevity, you have to be careful because they can redefine their own company. And if they redefine their own company, they'll define it in a way that keeps them in that company. Or someone that can redefine their job sufficiently, they'll define it that way. Okay, who else wants to? I was wondering whether it was important that you left the plural of relationships when you asked for what is the relationship as opposed to what are the relationships.

So let me ask you a question. What's the relationship between these three boxes? Well, there are two differences and one the same. And a differences person will actually ask you that question. Why don't you ask for the relationships rather than the relationship?

So his answer, even though he mentioned sameness, we have a tip-off where he actually said how many relationships are there. So let's look at job longevity. My prediction is probably 18 months. My first job, I went through a number of different jobs lasting 6 to 12 months. And my last job I've been in for 11 years.

And what is the job you're doing now? I'm working as a family doctor. Would you say there's a lot of change in it, though? There will be. Would you say that there was a lot of change in the job or enough differences to keep you...

Well, first of all, let me ask you this question. When you change jobs a lot, were you already a doctor? Yes. And the job that you're in right now, is there a lot of change or is it that you get to see a lot of different people? Is there a reason why you feel that there's enough change for you?

That's a difficult question to answer. There's a lot of change being forced upon us. But I mean, for the last 11 years, has there been a lot of changes that you've been able to do? Like, have you changed your office? Have you changed location of office?

Have you changed job description? Have you seen different kinds of patients? Yes, I am changing my job description. Have you changed your office at all, or have you been in the same office for 11 years? Same office.

Well, that's a surprise. Did you move the furniture in your office at all? Yes. How often did you move the furniture in your office? Twice.

Okay, one of the ways we solved, we had one client that had a manager that was coming up to the end of their stay and was acting that they were about to leave, and we actually had the firm switch the manager's office, just totally switch the office, and that kept him for another five years after we did that. So what I'm guessing is if you've been there 11 years, you've been able to create enough change for yourself that you feel comfortable with the amount of change that there is. I would say that's right. When that happens, then we can look for the exception. But I'm honestly surprised that you actually stayed there 11 years.

So you must like the amount of change that occurs in your job. Would you say? I have been planning to move on in life. How long had you been planning this? This has been evolving over the past two or three years.

Okay, so because you had a plan, then you were willing to stay there. That's right. Okay, so someone who's got a lot of differences is going to also have a high need for change. Someone who has a lot of differences is also going to have a high need for change. This is the end of Tape 21, Side A.

Okay, who else? Let's do someone else. Yvonne, what's the relationship between these three boxes? Well, they're all the same box, but one happens to be slightly different in the way it's turned. But they're all the same box, all the same shape, size.

And how long have you been doing what you're doing? Well, I've just given that a lot of thought. In most of my life, things have changed quite quickly within 18 months and now I've found that disconcerting. But I have just had a business for seven years and I've given that up and I lived in the house for seven years and I decided it was time for a change. So on your little chart there you check they're mostly the same and there are some differences.

But by the way I want to point out to you if you look at the boxes I'm going to turn them upside down or look at them that way you'll notice they're not actually the same size. The boxes are actually, for those of you if you want to look at the boxes just for fun, if you turn the box sideways you'll notice that they're not actually all the same size. It's just an optical delusion. Yes, Joe. Well, I looked at the boxes that way, and they looked like they were the same size to me.

Now, I did notice, they looked to me, to begin with, as the same, but with a difference. How long have you been doing what you're doing? What I'm doing right now, about 18 months, but before that, the average is about seven years. I was in the Army for six, with Schlumberger for six, with my previous employer for nine, and I got increasingly disgruntled with them, and it was just a matter of time before I left. Well, yeah, nine years would be.

So your average is going to be about seven years. About seven, yeah. It is about seven. Okay. Yes, Joel.

Ted, I have a question. What would you do with, or what would you interpret an answer that says, these three boxes make up a bigger rectangle? I've gotten that. Yeah. These three boxes make up a bigger rectangle.

I would ask them, what's the relationship between what you're doing on the job now and what you were doing a year ago? And, or, what's the relationship between these three coins? The bigger rectangle could be a sameness thing. I don't know, with further questioning, the fact that they don't even see three boxes could be a sameness thing. Or they could be looking at what's not there, in which case it's a differences thing.

But I'm not just going to suggest that. Joel's trying to, he's going, ooh. Okay. I've always done projects. And if I was in a project that went on for longer, I moved house, you know, I built a house.

I had to keep going some direction. So what's the relationship between these two offices? I think they're all different. They're all different? Yes.

And how long have you been on the projects that you've done? Well, the first job I did was 18 months, but I moved from one job on to the next job within the job. And in the second job, you could apply for jobs within the company. So I kept moving. I moved to a different city, then I moved back again, then I moved about two jobs up in the company.

So then I was on my way to move. I met my husband, so I decided to marry him and give up moving. That was a good way to avoid moving, yeah? Well, I had to do something. Do you rearrange the living room often?

Yes, yes, yes. How often? I have a need to... Things must have a place for everything. But I mean, how often do you rearrange your living roughly?

Once a month? Oh, no. I'm not that anxious for housework. Oh, that's good. 18 months. 18 months, yeah. Okay, that's good.

So there's a real clear example of differences. Anyone else? Well, now I mainly see the similarities, but I've never lasted more than 18 months in a job until I started working essentially for myself and found myself in Tucson one week, L.A. the next, Seattle the next. Then I loved it, and what I learned from that was being independent was what I really needed to do. Yeah.

It is possible that another metaprogram could come into play, as we pointed out earlier. It is also possible that if a person whose total sameness goes into a company where there's too much change, they will overreact. So that's also possible. So someone whose total sameness, I mean, I've worked with total... Oh, I meant total sameness.

Yeah, but someone who is total sameness, they go into a company where there's a lot of change or a lot of uncertainty, they'll blow out of there in weeks because, or there's too much change, or even if they hear that there's too much change, they could blow out very quickly. So that's another issue to the sameness. Someone who has real heavy sameness will have a problem with too much change in the environment. So it's possible that that could happen. So you're going to have to look and see which one is so for you.

You might have had really high independence needs and had to work individually, and that could be why you had to change jobs. I saw sameness with some difference. And when I owned a business, everything was the same but the variety. The differences was really important. Now that I'm an employee, I want consistency.

I want to know, what am I supposed to do? And quit changing it. Right. So, but how long have you been on this job? Two years.

So, just probably, somewhere around seven years. Seven years of self-employed. Yeah, probably about seven years, you're going to have to get some kind of changes for yourself. Just might change your desk around or put a different picture on the wall or get another office or something like that. Yeah.

Probably in government, they'd set that up for you, too. I mean, just changing offices might occur. Okay, let's look at the emotional stress response. Tell me about a work situation that gave you trouble. This is number 13, and we're on page 3-8.

Tell me about a work situation that gave you trouble. Who wants to do that? By the way, if you're not doing it in a work context, just about a situation that gave you trouble. Tell me about a work situation that gave you trouble, though. We're doing it in a business context.

It was several years ago. I was working with this horrible person. Is that associated or disassociated? By the way, Sun's plugged right into it. Look at her face.

She's already in a state, in that state. All you have to do is look and see if the person's associated or disassociated, whether she's associated. We're done. And you don't have to get any more information than that, even. I mean, that's all you need.

You can go right on to the next question. Okay, let's have someone who's a thinker. Who would be a thinker in this case? Okay, David, talk to me. I got into a situation, I got into a development I was in for six years, got a million-two in debt, and it took me a while to fight myself back out.

Very uncomfortable situation. But I made the decision quickly, and once I was in, six, seven years is really average with me. Yeah. So this was a situation that gave David trouble. Notice he really didn't associate into the state of being in trouble.

He described it, but not particularly associated. So that was good. And you could hear the difference in the voices, too. So that's great. Excellent.

Okay. Time storage we got. This is fun. Let's hear about the modal operator sequence. Let's hear your modal operator sequence.

How did you get up this morning? What did you say to yourself? What did you get up? What? I say, got to get up, got to get up.

Got to. Oh, got to get up, got to get up twice. Write that down twice. It's time to get up. It's time.

Okay. Ryan? It's light outside. I want to get up and go for a walk. Okay.

I want to. Want to is the modal operator. I want to get up. Who else? Who else?

Who else has got an interesting one? We have another day to play. We have another day to play. What's the modal operator in there, though? Have to, have to play.

Well, some folks have a modal operator of, which is necessity, but it's not necessity. Like, for me, when I want to do something that's so, that I want to do it so much, I have to, I have to. Well, actually, I gotta. So it's so compelling that I gotta, right? Okay, so model operator sequence is very simple.

You just write it down, whatever you're looking for. All right, so what I'd like to do next is to demonstrate an eight minute, or eight minute or so, metaprogram elicitation. And I'd like to demonstrate it exactly the same way that we did it when we did business consulting. And we actually, you can take a lot longer than eight minutes to elicit these metaprograms, which, you know, if you wanted to, then you certainly could, but if you could do it in eight minutes, you'd get a heck of a lot of information in a very short period of time. So we've gone through all the questions.

You guys can see what you think. You've got one form here, which you can use to do the elicitation. And you also have, certainly, it's called the Metaprograms and Values Inventory, MPVI 1-88. And that's the form we're using. And that's just one page, two sides.

You can use that form. You can copy it. No problem. Okay. So who would like to have their metaprograms elicited?

Let's do Ian. Let's do Ian. Murray, I'd love to have you, but we'll save you for something. Ian, come on up. So Ian, what do you want in a job?

What's important to you in a job? I guess. Change. That about tops it, everything. Great.

By the way, Ian, I'm going to ask you some questions now. which are not probably going to be as straightforward as that, and they may sound a little weird to you, but the fact is that I'm not really interested in what you think, particularly as much today as in how you think. Right. And so I may, to be honest with you, interrupt you at any moment and go on to the next question, but the idea is just to sort of move through these, if that's okay with you. Okay. Okay.

So why are you choosing to do what you're doing? Because I like... When I get out of bed in the morning, I guess I have some objectives to do, and I kind of like exactly the setup that I've got now. I guess I just like doing that. Great, and how do you know when you've done a good job?

I mean, do you just know inside? Yeah, I've had those feelings, yeah. And how do you know someone else is good at what they do? I look at their results. And how often does someone have to demonstrate competency before you're convinced?

Once. One time? Mm-hmm. Okay. Do you know what you need to do to increase your chances for success on a given job or a given project?

Yes. And do you know a good way for someone else to increase their chances? Yes. Do you find it easy to tell them or not so easy? Easy to tell them.

Easy to tell them. Okay. When you come into a situation, do you usually act quickly after sizing it up? Quickly. You don't do a detailed study of all the concepts?

No, you're pretty quick. Yes, okay. All right. Got that. Tell me about a work situation in which you were the happiest in one time event.

I got a lot of them. Okay. Let me just pick one. Well, I guess the last financial year, we ended up very successful. Yeah, tell me about that.

Well, our balance sheet and profit loss were pretty good by the time we took out the end-of-year figures and had a meeting. And tell me more, tell me more. Want to know all the details? Oh, just a little bit more. Who's we, by the way?

I made a lot of changes last year, and as a company, we met a lot of goals, and I guess the end result, the single most result, is that we ended up really well on the proper loss statement. What's your favorite restaurant? I have several. Tell me about it. I like a variety of food.

I have two Chinese restaurants, Greek. Ian, pick one of those and tell me why that's your favorite. If you would. In each of those, there's a lot of activity. I mean, they have a band or...

There's a lot of people. They're very popular restaurants. And they usually have difficulty even getting a seat on their reservations. Great. So if we were going to do a project together, would you need to know all the details first or the big picture first?

Big picture. Big picture, and would you really need to know the details? No. No. Okay.

What's the relationship between these three boxes? One up, two on the side. What's the relationship between what you're doing this year and what you're doing last year in the company? I've undergone a lot of change this year. So is it somewhat different, a lot different?

A lot of difference. Is there more difference than sameness? Much more difference than sameness. Okay. Tell me about a work situation that gave you trouble.

Not reading the marketplace, relying upon a large customer, and they underwent a lot of change themselves. They went Chapter 11, a U.S.-based company, and they did the Chapter 11 for protection, not for bankruptcy. That's good. No, that's good. Thank you.

Can you tell me where your past is? Yeah. Where's your past? Right out there. Where's your future?

Up there, three times. Uh-huh. And what did you say when you got up this morning? Remember when you got up this morning? I absolutely have to get out of bed.

I have to, huh? Okay. Okay. Okay. Great.

How long did that take? Five minutes? Great. Thank you, Ian. Give him a hand.

I'll go back and talk about him in just a minute. Okay, so that was a five-minute... Isn't that funny? I had a sense of urgency. I thought I was running late.

Okay, so let's go back, and I'll give this to you in a minute, Ian. Thanks for helping me fill this out. So what did you guys get from Ian in terms of direction metaprogram? Toward. There might be some away from, and one of the away froms might be change.

If I really needed to calibrate that, I might ask him what the issue with change was. Remember, what is change? It's a comparative. The word change itself is going to be a comparative. Change compared to what?

So I might just automatically classify that as a big T with a little bit of A, or I might classify it. I'd have to ask him first. But it's possible that that was the case. He also has a high need for activity, which oftentimes is away from boredom. What did you guys get on the reason metaprogram?

Possibility. Frame of reference? Internal. Convincer? C.

And how many times? Well, he told us, didn't he? One time. Management direction? Self and others.

Would you say he's active or reflective? Oh, active, yeah. Boy. He didn't even wait for the question to be over. Right?

Would you say, now, this is a question, would you say that he's independent management or team? And what was the reason you said management, by the way? We. Good, good, good, good. Yeah.

So every time that he said that, he said we. But I didn't hear him talk about that. So I would think I would classify him as kind of in between management and independent. He's got a real high independence needs. I did hear him say that, yeah.

He said I did this and so forth. Yes, but when he was talking about, he talked a lot about we. So, and work preference? Work preference? Systems, and I went back and checked people when I got down to favorite restaurant.

So, what do we get in his favorite restaurant? Activity is number one, then what? I would say people's number two, and then something else is number three. Yeah, or things, because when you talk about menus, you're talking about things, right? And global to specific, or specific to global, or what?

Global. Yeah, okay. And relationship metaprogram. I would say differences with exception. I'd want to, at least based on the answer we got, there was some differences with exception.

When you say almost all different, or roughly that's what you said, right, Ian? Almost all different, yeah. There is some sameness. But again, he's in his own company, so he's going to be on the job longer because he can create the amount of change he needs. Emotional stress response?

Dissociated. Modal operator sequence? Have to. Attention direction. There's no question.

You just observe. And what you're looking at is for the compulsive others person, if you're going to be hiring for that. What did you get for Ian? I would say self. He was, in terms of how I would calibrate, I would say both.

Because he was calibrating me for response. And he was also calibrating the room a little bit. You guys in the room. And he was also internal for self. So I would give him a check of both.

And that took five minutes. Do we have a lot of information here, buddy? Yeah. We have a tremendous amount of information in a very short period of time. Something that's useful.

We probably know him a lot better now than probably a lot of people know him. And if we spend some time talking to him, and so what I used to do, by the way, when we owned the consulting firm, was I used to take each of these for every single client. We used to get one of these forms filled out for every single client that we had. And then I would put it on a, not a spreadsheet because it was in my, it wasn't a day timer, but it was in my calendar book. It would fold out to eight and a half by 14.

It would fold out to a long thing. Across the left side was the names of the people. Across the top was direction metaprogram. All the values, all the direction metaprogram, all of the client's decision and motivation strategy, modal operative sequence, and all of it was on one piece of paper, all of the clients. So when I'd flip open the thing to talk to somebody in another office, or one of our clients, or one of our consultants, at night, if I was at home talking to a consultant, I'd flip open my book, and I'd look at this person.

I'd go, okay, this person is toward and a little bit away from possibility metagram, internal frame of reference. And then I would use my language in that way. So I'd use my language to feed back to them the kind of information they needed to have. And I've given you an example of how to feed back the language and Probably, you might want to, page 311, it starts on page 311, you might want to actually, if you're going to use metaprograms a lot and you want to use them to motivate people and fit right inside their own processes and so forth, I would memorize these, if I were you. They work real well.

We taught the consultants this, so a client that has toward and away from, here are our goals and objectives, and here's what we want to avoid, toward client, here are our goals and objectives, and just some ideas about how to frame your languaging for the client. Okay, so let's do an exercise. Okay, an eight minute, or actually since I did it in five, you guys can do it in ten or less. We'll take ten minutes apiece, and what I would say, I tell you, when I used to say, when I went into the engineering firm and I said to these guys, we met with everybody in the firm one by one, one on one. And what we said to them was, this is really neat, we said, I don't really care what you think.

For purposes of this interview, I'm not interested in what you're thinking. I'm only interested in how you're thinking. And I've got to tell you, at least half the mid-level managers that I talked to went like this. Okay, let's talk. And I said, I'm only interested in patterns.

I'm only interested in process. And I may actually interrupt you in your content and move on to the next question. If I've got enough information, I'll just move right on to the next question. And I can't tell you how relieved they were when you'd say that to them. So if you do a metaprogram solicitation with someone, say that to them.

Say, for purposes of this interview, we're not interested in content as much as we are process. We're not interested in what you think. We're interested in how you think. And so let me just ask you some questions that will determine that. Okay.

Any questions about the process? I think we've gone over this enough. Let's just do it. Groups of three. Ten minutes apiece.

If you're done earlier, we'll start again earlier. And if you're listening to the tapes, if you would, please, go ahead and stop the tape now and do the exercise. All right. Welcome back. Glad you guys are back.

Are there any questions? On number six, management direction filter, we had some confusion on what self but not others describes because you said that that was the way you described it was someone who just said, Who am I to tell other people what to do? My interpretation of C was if you found it not so easy, that would be a person's self but not others. Who am I not to, yes, exactly right. Sort of like I'm not really, it's not that easy for me to do it no matter what my motivation.

We're saying the same thing. Oh, okay. But there was some misunderstanding about the terminology. So if I find it not as easy to, you know, some people just go, okay, this is how you need to do it. I don't find it that easy to do that, so I would be self, but not others.

Okay. One person could say, and maybe this is just what you said, but one person could say, I don't know how to tell them, and one person would say, it's not my place to tell them. That's really two different things. You know, like, I don't know how, and I don't really give two hoots. This is a PG-rated tape set.

Thanks, Simon. I appreciate you. So, the answer is if they answer no, so if they yes, if they answer yes, no, then it's self. If they answer yes, yes, no, then it's self but not others. I'm talking about the list of questions here.

Right. We're saying the same thing. We're all saying the same thing. Self only is, do you know what you need to do to increase your chances for success on a job? Yes.

Do you know a good way for someone else to increase their chances? No. That's self only. And self but not others is, do you know what you need to do to increase your chances for success on a job? Yes.

Do you know a good way for someone else to increase their chances? Yes. Do you find it easy to tell them they're not so easy? Not so easy. That's self, but not others.

Okay? And often that's, and I added that for the people from the 60s who said, who am I to say that is not the only condition. I'm sorry if I implied that was the only condition under which that would occur. Other questions? I have a question on number 13 and 14.

I know you said earlier that these aren't supposed to generalize or interact towards each other, but then... Let's say there's no necessary relationship where if an answer to one is X, the answer to the other has to be X. Oh, okay. Because I also noticed that, I guess in your practitioner training, you mentioned that if you're in time, then you usually, when you recall a memory from the past, then you associate into it. And then if you're through time, because it's in front of you, you're generally disassociated.

That's correct. However, it is possible to have somebody with an emotional stress response that's associated, but have them still be through time. Because I have had through time managers who got really upset when you asked that question, when they associated it with a thing. So it is possible for a through time person to associate in. That's also true.

Okay. This is the end of Tape 21, Side B.