# Boardbreaking, Metaprograms,Mbti

So we'd like to demonstrate another way of doing this. Actually, everybody's got a different way of doing it. So Donna, if you'd come up. You want to do a one-inch break? Okay, cool.

Good, Dana, good. That was good. Obrigado. Do you want to ask Don any questions? Don is in a different state now.

Okay. I just perceived that at first you seemed kind of casual compared to Tad's physiology. Yours was less intense. But when you actually broke the board, you got mad. And that's what I saw.

I'm not sure that was true. But when the intensity was there, I mean, you were unstoppable. Is that what happened? That's what it feels like. Same question as to Tad.

When you decided to break it, how did you know when it was time to break it? And further on from that, when you didn't break it, what was your reassurance strategy to know when the second time to break it, and what was the difference? I've done one-inch breaks before, so I know that I can do them. When I break the board and it breaks like that, there's no stopping. And I think that for a moment or for a second, everything disappears and there's just me and the board.

So it's kind of like going into the void. It feels like that, which is that I have an all-or-nothing kind of attitude, and that's all there is. There's nothing else. What it feels like to me when I break the board is I'm either going to break it or I'm going to die. Seriously.

That's the way that I break it. So it's all or nothing. When you did break it, it looked to me instead of having your hand down, you broke it with your fist. Are you kidding? Absolutely not.

Just a second. Excuse me just for a second. Do you see these nails here? These nails were done yesterday, by the way. Now let me just ask the ladies in the crowd, would you break a board like that way with, no, Jane's going, no way.

Yeah, definitely with the flat of your hand. By the way, under no circumstances, if you're doing this at home, should you ever break the board with a closed fist unless you've been trained to do it. This way is with an open hand on the heel of your hand resting right there. Donna, did it feel like you died twice then? It never feels like I'm going to die, but I'm going to break the board or.

So that's the feeling that I have with it. There's a point of no return where I have every single thing that I have doing that and nothing else. So everything else disappears and it's just that. This question is for both of you. What do you do when you go through your recovery state?

What do you think or what do you do? Well, point i said oh this is really interesting this is this is really funny this is really interesting what what am i not doing what am i not doing that i usually do okay so what you saw at the end was oh the heck with it boom so um i guess that took me to that state. I have never broken a board on stage before in front of a group since my master practitioner five years ago, six years ago. Oh, I'm sorry. Yes, thank you.

What do I think of? I think of being space denied. I think of, I just remember all the times I did it. So for me, it's just stacking up positive internal representations. Donna, how do you know when not to do it?

Probably a kinesthetic feeling. I don't say anything to myself. It's just I wait for a, yeah, I can do it. Boom. And that's a feeling, not a, yeah, I can do it.

Yeah, that's a feeling. I don't think I hear the words, but that's a feeling, and that's what the feeling feels like. Yeah, I can do it. How did you know when to do it the first time? The first time...

That was a long time ago. You mean on the tape? 1989? 1989. By the way, when you're doing modeling, you'll often get that kind of response. I wanted to, very badly. I wanted to.

And I watched, I modeled TED, and I think I wanted to with everything that I had, and so that's where probably I got to that. I had a resource experience or a reference experience of going for it. There's no return, of diving into a swimming pool. You get to a space where you can't stop. Even if you go in slow motion, there's a space where you can't stop and you go for it.

And so I think I use that as a reference experience to know that there's a space here where you go for it without holding back or anything. You just go through it. But I see the board broken, too. I see the board already broken. When I was sitting back there, I saw it broken.

So I do visualize that, too. Okay. Thank you, Donna. I took all my rings off of my board-breaking hand. You may want to do that, especially if you have a ring that's large or strange.

I have both, so you may want to do that. So are you guys ready? You totally ready? There are three stations, no waiting. It's just like the old barber chairs.

So just go ahead, and if you're listening to the tapes, if you're going to do this exercise, you can go ahead and stop the tapes now. All right, welcome back. How did you guys do? Merry, merry, merry. Man, you did it.

And Yvonne, you guys did good. Yeah, Yvonne, stand up. Come on, you guys. Good job. Excellent.

Excellent. So let me just ask you guys a question. Was this about breaking boards? Exactly right. It's not about breaking boards.

It was about something else. What that is, we have no idea. That's our tour de force of modeling. I expect that at this point you guys are most excellent modelers. And so I'd like to leave you with just one thought.

That perhaps sometime in the future you'll be called upon to say something. And as you go to bed tonight, you may have dreams of integration. Because, hey, why not dream? And everybody dreams, so you might as well dream tonight. And dream something nice.

Now, tomorrow's a day off, so just relax and really cruise. Take it easy. Don't even think. Consciously. Or perhaps you're unconscious.

And we're through with the first week, so we've done a lot this week. You guys did really, really good. Those of us who are here, and that doesn't include me, are totally tickled about how well we're doing. So we're doing just magnificently. So really take it easy.

Remember to fill out your tests, fill out your NLP test that you've got, remember to do your value test and your meta programs and values inventory, because we're going to do values and MPDI first thing the day after the day off. And so as you go to bed and sleep tonight, it's quite likely that you might even have a few dreams of integrating certain things at the unconscious level. I'm not going to suggest that linguistics could integrate, that you could think of the void or not think of the void, or think of boundaries and think of all the ways and the patterns that you use can just go right over the boundary. And I'm sure that your unconscious mind will probably come up with a dream or two that will make you feel that you're totally ready to start all over again. So you will.

And again, because we're just going to take a day off, just one day, just one day. We'll just take one day off, and then we're going to cruise. So have an absolutely great day off, you guys. And by the way, good job. It's time to talk about metaprograms.

So we're going to be looking at Chapter 3. So why don't you grab Chapter 3 and flip it over, and we'll start with Slide 117. And there are some things which in the past constituted the major elements of neurolinguistic programming. I don't know if you all have seen this diagram before. In the early days of NLP, this is how we represented what NLP actually was.

Today, the model's more represented by the communication model on page 1-4. We could look at that, too. Let's look at that for just a second. And what we see is that there are three things, three major things that NLP originally said that it was made up of, or the three major studies of what is comprised as a human being. And if you look on our NLP communication model, at the left side you'll see internal representation, and then you'll see internal state, and then you'll see down at the bottom right, external behavior.

And NLP started off by looking at, although in chunking down somewhat, we end up with the NLP communication model. NLP is essentially, if you look at slide 117, NLP is essentially the study of external behavior, which includes physiology, internal state, which includes the states as well as probably the filter patterns that create them, and internal process, which is the strategies and submodalities. And that's what NLP, that's how we thought of ourselves in NLP for a number of years. And then something happened around 1985, which I think was timeline therapy, which gave us the arrow of time, which is on slide number 118. So I think at this point, we could say that NLP is comprised of the study of external behavior, internal process, and internal state as those three major elements move through time.

As those three elements move through time. And interestingly enough, to go back and look at a format that we're familiar with, the format system, we, I think in NLP, have attempted to ask or answer the question of what, which is related to external behavior, how, which is related to internal process, why, which is related to internal state and the filter patterns, and then what if, which is related to how these things transition over time. So neuro-linguistic programming has spent a fair amount of time looking at what, why, how, and more recently at the question of what if. And like the NLP communication model on page 1-2, I think we could lump all of NLP's techniques into these four major questions. When you look at, for example, the notion of rapport or physiology in the process of modeling, we're essentially talking about external behavior.

When you look at internal process, we're looking at strategies, primarily strategies, submodalities, maybe even parts integration. When you look at the issue of internal state, I think we also would probably under that include the filter pattern, metaprograms and values. And then with the addition of timeline therapy, the question of what if, which is what will happen or what is going to be the sequence of all of these things over a time period. Now, the interesting thing is that there's a whole other study from the point of view of a paper and pencil instrument that has been asking itself the same questions. And that's the Myers-Briggs.

And let's look at slide 120. The Myers-Briggs has been studying these very same issues as NLP has been studying. Actually, Briggs and Myers were not the first people to suggest that these four things were important. Actually, it was Carl Jung. And Carl Jung talked about the person who was a censor and or an intuitor.

Carl Jung talked about a person who was a thinker or a feeler and an introvert or extrovert. And interestingly enough, it's interesting that Jung was studying the same three things as NLP, and Myers-Briggs added the issue of judge and perceiver later on, much the same as we've added timeline therapy to NLP. So similarly, the Myers-Briggs attempts to answer the questions of what, which is the question of whether a person's an introvert or an extrovert, why, which is the question of whether a person is a thinker or a feeler, how, which is the question of whether or not a person is a censor or an intuitor, and what if, which is a temporal question and also relates to a judger and perceiver. So the Myers-Briggs attempts to answer the same question of external behavior, internal process, internal state, and the temporal operator, which is essentially time, or how all of these things relate and proceed over time. Y'all have taken the Myers-Briggs test, and the test has been scored, and we're going to talk about that in just a few minutes.

For those of you who are listening to the tape set, if you haven't taken a Myers-Briggs test before you actually listen to this segment or before you actually read the chapter in Timeline Therapy and the Basis of Personality on the Myers-Briggs, you may want to get a hold of a copy of the book Please Understand Me by Kiersey and Bates. And in the back of the book Please Understand Me, there is the Kiersey-Bates Temperament Indicator, which is a self-scoring test which will give you a very, very close approximation of what the Myers-Briggs test would. And the Kiersey-Bates, Kiersey-Bates is actually a standard also, and will give you pretty similar kinds of information. So, essentially, what we're looking at here, and let's go back again to page 1-4. What we're essentially looking at here is metaprograms.

And metaprograms are content-free filters. So our metaprograms are filters that assist us in the process of deleting and generalizing, thus creating our distortions, and that the metaprograms themselves actually filter information in much the same way as polarized sunglasses filter. Remember when you were a kid and they, I thought that was one of the best things that ever happened was polarized sunglasses. So you take those things and you look at the sky and you go, whoa, cool, and it would turn from dark to light. And they also had those glasses for the 3D movies, right?

And that was like one was polarized one way and one was polarized the other way and you'd put those on and the whole world would look weird. So in essence, polarized filters let a certain amount of light in and and so the filters that we use to filter our perception, where the external event on page 1-4 comes into this person's head, one of the major filters that it goes through are the metaprograms. Metaprograms are essentially content-free filters, and they're at a rather deep level. So most people are unaware of them. And yet, nevertheless, the metaprograms are filtering the information that comes into us, and they actually will filter the information in such a way that it will create our behavior, or create us acting in a certain way.

And so they're probably important to know. There are a number of them which are really, really important for communication and for presentation style and also when working with people. We've already touched on some of them. We even talked about Tordon away from it as early as the practitioner training because we needed to, I hope in your practitioner training you talked about that, because when you were putting together a chain of anchors, you need to know whether the second state was a state that was toward or away from. And we've also probably talked, you probably talked in your practitioner training a little bit about matchers and mismatchers and or polarity responders.

So all of those are, I think, important considerations. And the Myers-Briggs is sort of the granddaddy of them all, or probably the grandmother of them all, because it was taken from Carl Jung's work and two of his students, Isabel Briggs Myers and Catherine Myers, who, after studying with Carl Jung, went home and had some parties, actually, some coffee discussions over coffee, where they decided that they could actually tell whether a person was a sensor and an intuitor and a thinker or a feeler, and they actually invented a paper and pencil instrument, which has an interesting history. It was owned for a while by Educational Testing Service after it was put together. ETS did a lot of research. Educational Testing Service is the same people that gave you in the United States the college boards.

Those of you who are remembering those, ah, oh no. And then more recently owned by Consulting Psychologist Press. And the Myers-Briggs has statistics with hundreds of thousands of people who have been interviewed and tested. And so it's a pretty reliable instrument for predicting certain kinds of behavior. My belief is that the metaprograms essentially come out of or are based on a same sort of process of looking at the questions of the external behavior, internal process, internal state, and the temporal operator.

So with regards to the Myers-Briggs, and of course there are a lot of good books that you could read on Myers-Briggs, but we're looking at page 3.1. There's four things we can say about a person. There's essentially four basic things that we can say about a person and his or her personality. And the first relates to their external behavior and the question of whether the person is an introvert or an extrovert. Extroverts comprise about 75% of the U.S. population.

Introverts comprise about 25% of the U.S. population. And extroverts are, they're probably more outgoing. If you're at a party, they're going to be the people doing the introducing rather than the ones being introduced. Raging extroverts will actually, if you walk into a room, they'll come over to meet you. And they're the kind of folks who, when it's time to relax, will get together with about 10 or 15 people and go out and just hang out and get wild.

And Rowdy and the introverted person is probably a little more into themselves. They probably are, the introvert will probably spend more time alone. And when it's time to recharge, his or her batteries will spend time alone or with a single other person or another significant other person. There's a question that you can use for intuitive modeling of introvert and extrovert if you don't have time to give the entire Myers-Briggs, which I'd like to mention, and you may want to write it right here on page 3-1. And that question is, when it's time to recharge your batteries, do you like to be alone or with someone else?

When it's time to recharge your batteries, do you like to be alone or with someone else? And you may want to ask yourself that question. You may want to ask yourself that question. When it's time to recharge your batteries, do you prefer to be alone or with someone else? If you answered that you prefer to be alone, then you're probably an introvert.

If you answered that you prefer to be with other people when you're recharging your batteries, then you're likely to be an extrovert. Although, in the Myers-Briggs questionnaire itself, there are approximately 21 questions that they use, give or take a few, to determine the issue of introvert-extrovert. So, although we could determine introvert-extrovert with one question, usually the Myers-Briggs is going to be asking a number of other questions. And if you remember your questionnaire, questions like, are you usually a good mixer or rather quiet and reserved? When you're with a group of people, would you usually rather join in the talk of the group or talk with one person at a time?

These are all questions of whether or not you're an introvert or an extrovert. Extroversion is actually more prized in the United States. In fact, we look upon it as though it's more important. Although I think probably from the point of view of metaprograms, what I'd like to say is that we look at metaprograms with the attitude that there's no right or wrong metaprograms. So as you go through this segment of learning how to elicit metaprograms and learning how to, shall we say, type or look at a certain type of how a person is, I think it would be best to approach them in the essence that there's no right or wrong in essentially how people filter information.

There are some, for example, some states which are more highly useful, or there are some behaviors which are more useful. There are some filter patterns which are more useful in certain contexts. And what I'd like to do, I hope, in this segment is share those all with you. Okay, the next is internal process, and there are two categories, sensor and intuitor. Internal process, this is interesting because sensor and intuitor essentially relates to your chunking, your ability to chunk.

Someone who's a sensor will prefer details. They'll prefer, they'll have more interest in chunk down information. They'll find it very easy to get into detailed information. Someone who's really a sensor will have a lot of, a lot of desire to really get to the detailed information of what it is that you're talking about. Whereas the truth is an intuitor probably will get, if you give an intuitor too much information, the intuitor very well may get overloaded.

So the intuitor looks for relationships between information. The Intuitor looks for the big picture, the big chunk. The Intuitor essentially is looking to find out what is the bigger picture that this information represents. And when you took your test, when you took your Myers-Briggs test, it was questions like, if you were a teacher, would you rather teach fact courses or courses involving theory? Which, of course, fact courses are sensor, theory is intuitor.

Oh, in reading for pleasure, do you enjoy odd or original ways of saying things, or do you like writers to say exactly what they mean? Let's see what other questions here. In doing something that many other people do, does it appeal to you more to do it in the accepted way or to invent a way of your own? These are all questions that are dealing with whether or not a person is a censor or an intuitor. Interestingly enough, the Educational Testing Service,, when they were doing the statistics on sensor-intuitor, found that there was a direct relationship between intuitor and intelligence.

That is, the higher level a person were an intuitor, the higher level of intelligence they had. That's not to say it's more highly prized, because, in fact, if you've ever taken a college board examination, they tell you it doesn't matter if you finish the test. But, in fact, it does matter because if you don't finish the test, you don't get the points. And, in fact, it's not really a lie because if you don't finish the test, but you are going to be counted off anyway. It's just a matter of your score will be lower.

And what happens is that the intuitor can look at four answers and immediately grasp an answer, whereas the censor generally will have to go through each of the four answers to the question if there's four. They'll have to consider each one. And so the censor, because he or she is more chunked down in terms of the consideration process, will take a little bit longer time with that examination, which is probably why there's a direct relationship between sensor and intuitor. A question that you can use to intuitively or immediately find out, but again, remember there's about 21 questions on the Myers-Briggs that relate to sensor-intuitor. The question that you can ask for sensor-intuitor is, in gathering information about something new that you're learning, are you interested in just the facts, or are you more interested in the relationships between the ideas?

So you can, with one question, grasp whether a person is a sensor or an intuitor, but again, the Myers Myers-Briggs uses 21. And sometimes you may get an answer that's close, but again, the Myers-Briggs has about 55 or 65 points separating each side of sensor-intuitor. So again, asking one question, you're simply going to be sort of doing an intuitive feel for that. This is the end of Tape 19, Side A.