# 3 New Metaprograms, Model Of Therapy (Order And Sequence

Okay, so what we'd like you to do is to share with us your results on this and give us any feedback, if you would. Please email us at mind at aloha.com. Any questions or comments that you might have about these three metaprograms, we're going to continue to develop them, so by the time you hear those tapes, they may be far more developed than what we've done, and we'll be teaching it in our Master Practitioner class each year in June, July, wherever that is. It may not be at this hotel, but since we haven't said what hotel, you won't know. Or it may be at the other hotel.

And every November, every October, November, so keep in touch. And those of you guys who got this, give me some feedback on it if you think different questions would work better, but test them. There are some words in here that are very on purpose. The words in number 17, absolutely necessary, is on purpose. The word number 18, really compelled, is absolutely, is on purpose.

And the word should in number 19 is on purpose. We're trying to force a little more dichotomous choices, but it seems to me that if you wanted to explain, so the best questions would be short. The best questions would be shorter, but if you wanted to explain to someone the explanation that we've gone through here and how they would recognize each other, that certainly would be appropriate. Like if you wanted to say to somebody, well, this is what the external processor does, this is what the internal processor does, what do you think you are, that probably would be equally as appropriate. What was the question that you added to 19?

Well, see, I'm an inferential listener, so when you raise your hand, I had to get up and get the mic for you. Oh, thank you, sir. Jeez. The question that you added to 19, if you were with someone and you said you were thirsty. Oh, no, this isn't the question I added.

This was the previous question that we had that we didn't use. I'll tell you it again. If you were with someone and you were thirsty, would you be likely to say, I'm thirsty and expect they'd get you a drink? Or would you come to the point and ask them directly to get you a drink? And that question we dropped in favor of the one that's there based on our large research on the way out to the Hula Festival yesterday in the van with as many people as we could fit in, and everybody sort of agreed that that was a little bit better question.

So we continue to hone questions. The questions that you already have in the metaprogram's questionnaire have been honed since 1985, I think, roughly 1985. And we've worked with them with literally thousands of people at this point. But these are three new ones that we want to work with and discover what the response is going to be. Technically, the response, I'm really surprised at the number of people, the response in terms of the room, in terms of internal and external processing.

My guess is it would have been more 50-50. My guess is that inferential and literal might have been more 50-50 too, but I don't really. So give me your feedback. Let me know what's up. You guys want to have a moment, a significant metaprogram moment, and go elicit these three metaprograms from the same people you elicited the other ones from.

So let's go do that right now. If you're listening to the tapes, please stop the tapes and do that exercise right now. Elicit these three metaprograms from the same people you elicited the other 16 metaprograms from. Notice what answers you get, and then we'll get back and talk about it. If you're going to do the exercise, please stop the tape now and do the exercise.

All right, welcome back. Let's start. I want to give you guys one correction to the question, which if you're on the first question, which if you're listening to the tapes, that correction's already been made in the manual that you have. The question should read, and in terms of the evaluation, I'll tell you what to do about it. When you need to work through a problem or challenge in your life, is it absolutely necessary for you to talk about it with someone else or think about it by yourself only?

So change the word first to only. Okay, that forces a dichotomous choice, and here's the thing. If someone says both, then they are external. Okay, that forces the rest of the dichotomous choice. So if someone says both, then they are definitely external.

Okay, so the internal does not need to go external. The internal does not need to go external, or the person's probably mostly external. Okay, so we'll change that to only, and we'll look at what the results are. So let's do another percentage on that particular question. Okay, so how many people are external? 46% external.

Okay, how many people are internal? 52%? So there's 3% that are both or don't know. All right, so if you guys would give us feedback on that, that would be great. Are there any questions about these three new metaprograms? Excellent.

So metaprograms are filters, and if we go back and look at the filters page on page 1-4, we're going to move on to values. Essentially, what we said is that metaprograms are content-free filters, and that they behave because of the, or they behave in the same way of answering a lot of the questions of why, what, how, what if. Values, as we move on to values now, we're going to look at the question of why, and that's the next thing we're going to look at. Does the order of how you may proceed with various types of therapies, does that have any effect at all on your client? Like, I do a reframe, and I should have done timeline therapy first, and then I go back and do that, and I could work with the submodalities more.

Let's see. Typically what I'll do personally is my rule of thumb is to get rid of the negative emotions first, then the limiting decisions, then align any beliefs and values that need to be aligned. This is all going to come up in the Master Timeline Therapy segment. Then align any beliefs and values that need to be aligned. This is all going to come up in the master timeline therapy segment.

Then get rid of any, and then align any beliefs and values that need to be aligned, and then if something else needs to occur to do that. So for example, you might do a compulsion blowout, or you might do a swish pattern in order to give the client some sort of a procedure of where to go, or you might do a chain of anchors, like if the presenting problem was procrastination. And then after that, to do a parts integration. Actually, all of these questions stem from, I think, a question of not knowing how to proceed. So let's look at page 5.1, just for a second.

This, I think, will sort of give you an idea of, this is how I do therapy. This is how, when I'm working with a client, this is where I begin, this is where I go to. So I think this should answer your question, Mitch. Personally, what I want to do, client comes in and is in a present state. That's at the top left.

And we want to move the client to a desired state. Or, client comes in with old model of the world, and we want to move them to new model of the world. So let's see what we might do. First thing we want to do is discover the model of the world. So we're going to use metamodel.

We're going to take a detailed personal history. We're going to establish rapport, set outcomes, find out what the metaprograms are, the values, whatever presuppositions are inherent. We're going to use the keys to an achievable outcome and the well-formedness conditions, and we may even elicit the client's strategies for producing that behavior as we find out the model of the world. Then we're going to loosen up the model of the world and we'll use Milton Model, we'll use Meta Model 3, we'll use logical levels of therapy and quantum, any other form of quantum linguistics that we need in order to produce, in order to sort of loosen the client's hold on the model of the world. I often think, I don't know if you've ever heard anybody describe their problem to you and then to someone else and then to someone else, but if you pay attention to how people describe their problem, it's often the same.

So they'll have what I call a real solid grasp. It's almost like this chair, see? So the client goes, I've got this problem. And it becomes so, the description is so much the same every time they describe it that the more they describe it, the more real it becomes. So now then they walk around with their problem like this.

They carry it with them and they go, hey, you want to see my problem? See, I'll just show it to you. And so here's the problem. And it's like carrying around a chair. And the more they describe the problem, the more real it gets for them.

So the more they describe the problem, the more they get hooked into it. And the more they get hooked into it, then the more you have to loosen it up before you begin to do anything else. So the second thing that's going to happen for me is I'm going to do some sort of quantum linguistics to loosen the model of the world, which would include, like I said, Milton model, metamodel, any other language patterns, logical levels of therapy for sure. And then I'm going to do the change work, which is step number three. And then during the change work, I might do, I'll probably begin with timeline therapy, and I might also do anchoring and reframing.

I probably would work with values. I'd probably do some submodalities work, hypnosis, especially when working with physiological symptomology. Might change strategies, might do parts integration. And then I'll do the cleanup. And at that point, I'm going to check ecology, which is essentially to make sure that what we've done is appropriate for all of the parts inside of the individual.

Here's the deal. If it hasn't come up during the model of the world, that is, if the client hasn't said, well, part of me feels this way or part of me feels that way, And if it hasn't come up during the change work, where the client says, well, part of me feels this way or that way, or if I've not felt there was a part that was a problem, then I'm going to check on parts during the cleanup. I mean, that's how important I think it is to pay attention to that issue. And the ecology, which is to make sure you ask the client, you know, is this agreeable to all of your unconscious mind? If you found some secondary gain, you want to make sure the client has the secondary gain issues handled so that the problem doesn't have to reappear again so that, I mean, so they get strokes in other ways or they get what they needed in some other way.

And generally, just to make sure that the whole thing is aligned at the unconscious level. And then step number five is to future pace. We're going to future pace perhaps some new behaviors or new ways of acting or new ways of new states. And we're going to fill up the client's convincer. So we're going to future pace and make sure that the client's convincer is filled up by the time we finish step number five.

And so all of that, all of that happens. The client then ends up in a desired state or with a new model of the world. And that's how I approach an entire intervention. So I'm going to be working on all of those as I approach the client. And I may not use all of these every time I do an intervention, but these are essentially the five steps that I'll do.

So I really know where I am. And so from my point of view, Mitch, if it doesn't matter in change work whether I do one of these in any specific order, although to be honest with you, I generally tend to do timeline therapy first, and I generally tend to do hypnosis last. And hypnosis would be, again, to aid, or to enlist the aid of the unconscious mind in healing any physiological symptomology. But I will generally tend to do that last, and timeline therapy first. And then whatever needs to happen in between, in between.

And so, as you might imagine, this is probably not an hour of an intervention. Depending on how long you take with a detailed personal history, it might be two, two and a half hours of detailed personal history. I mean, on a five hour session, I might do two, two hours of that. So, once, once we've got that detailed personal history, then the, and as you'll see when you get to the timeline therapy segment, when you take a detailed personal history, what happens is that all of the interventions will just sort of fall out of that. In other words, you'll see clearly what it is you need to do at that point.

You'll really get a clear idea of what you need to do. And literally everything you've learned then in NLP is right here on this page. And they order in sequence of how to do it. Yeah? And that's pretty much, that's pretty much what I would do.

Just think of it this way. If you get the model of the world, first thing you want to do is get the client's model of the world. And as I mentioned, it's kind of like, it's pretty solid for most, for some clients, so you've got to loosen it up. And then do the change work. Whatever the change work needs to be.

And then do the cleanup, check the ecology, make sure that it's agreeable to all the parts inside, check the alignment, et cetera, and then feature phase. And that's really the sum total of the entire process. You mentioned you do five-hour-long therapies. Is this it one time? No, no.

Oh, no. Then how would you break it up is my question. Well, I don't do a 50-minute hour because I'm fortunately not required to. So usually I'll go, the first time I see a client, I'll go up to two hours or three hours with a client, straight through. If it's a five hour session, then we'll probably do that over two days.

Longer than that will probably take over, any longer than that would take three days. I'll generally try to see them three days in a row because what I want to do is I want to go through the processes and the change work as quickly as possible so that the client then can go away and have it integrate. And then we'll have the client come back to make sure in a follow-up, just a single follow-up or two follow-ups, to make sure that they got the results they wanted. Typically, that's what I'll do. And where would be the good places to break these?

Well, typically what I'll do is, here's what I'll do. I'll do a detailed personal history first, which, as I mentioned, is in the Master Practitioner Tape Set, and all of the stuff in the Model of the World. I probably will loosen up the Model of the World and do some change work, and that'll be the end of the first day. You probably won't get much more than two or three hours out of a client before they get too tired to proceed. Or their unconscious mind will be too tired.

So you probably should not plan on doing more than three hours with a client and watch the client because some clients can only go for two. But I would like to, in seeing a client, I would like to have the opportunity to do some sort of change work to see if, when the client comes back the next day, if the change work, shall we say, stuck, or if it stayed done that way. So, like, for example, if I did a swish pattern for nail biting, and then the client came back the next day, I would like to know in the ensuing 24 hours, did the client ever have any urge to bite their nails? Okay? So what I want to see is did what we did sort of take.

Most always it does. And with timeline therapy, it's a lot more sure than many of the NLP techniques, so that really cements at home. And if I'm doing timeline therapy, too, I will delete with the client one negative emotion and then have them come back the next day and test so that they have a real convincer over time that the emotions from the past have disappeared. So there's two things that occur there. One is I want to test, but I also want to have the client have some conscious, unconscious integration about the fact that the problem they had or that something changed since they came to me.

So they came to me, we took a detailed personal history, then I do a little bit of an intervention, then they come back the next day. That increases their belief that it's going to work. Because if they come in one day and we do something and it works, then they come back the next day and their belief of everything else working is going to be increased. On the other hand, I also want to know if it didn't stick so that I can then find out why. And it's very simple to me why something doesn't stay.

In other words, if you do an NLP piece of change work, to me there's only a few issues of why something wouldn't stay the way it was when you completed it, if you were sure and if you got congruency from the client. And those reasons would be, one is that we haven't looked at the past sufficiently. That is to say, we didn't take into account the client's history, the past, so there's something in the past which conflicts with the present change. So that means either there's a negative emotion in the past or a limiting decision that isn't complete for the client. The second possibility is that there could be a part of the client's unconscious mind, or even, in some rare cases, all of the client's unconscious mind, which for some reason is not totally aligned with the process of change.

And so then that part, or all of the client's unconscious mind, might undo the change for ecology reasons or for secondary gain. In which case, then, we probably would have to make, we'd probably want to go back again and find out what that was, handle the secondary gain or handle the ecology so that it was ecological for the client to make the change. And then it might take a day for us to find that out because we might not have gotten all that information from the client. Erickson used to say, you know, the client may not tell you everything the first time you see the client. They may not feel comfortable telling you everything.

They may not feel safe. There could be lots of reasons why they wouldn't say everything they needed to say in the process of making that change. So we want to find all that out. And giving it a day or having a week later follow-up will allow us to find that out. So I think that it's appropriate to, especially in NLP, although much has been made in the field of instantaneous change and one-hour magical therapies or one-time interventions.

I'm certainly into brief therapy, but I don't necessarily subscribe to the notion that we have to do it in an hour, and I don't subscribe to the fact that we have to do it in one session, because I think a lot of the people who attempt to do that end up having clients have the problems not complete themselves during that one session, and the problem comes back, or there are other expressions of the symptomology. So I think it's very important to do follow-up. So what I would recommend is, and when we get to the timeline therapy segment, there's estimates of how much time it will take for each thing. But for example, if a client comes to me and it's a performance issue, I'll begin by saying it'll probably take five hours. You need to be committed to schedule five hours with me.

Or up to five hours. If it's a health issue, I'll say it may take up to eight hours, and you may need to be committed to scheduling eight hours. If it's a couple counseling, I'll say you need to be committed to spending up to eight hours, both of you, with me, plus the amount of time it takes to fill out the Myers-Briggs. So they're probably looking at the values survey and so forth. So they're probably looking at 10 hours invested time in that regard.

So then the client's committed to, for example, five hours. Oftentimes it'll take less, but I want the client to be committed to, and I'll schedule that much time for myself. So performance enhancement, like a salesman that wants to sell more, or a manager that wants to have better communication with his team, or a manager actually that wants to build more team into his, or more notion of team into his management style. All of those are individual performance enhancement issues. Generally those take up to five hours.

Sometimes you'll get lucky, you'll hit it on three. Okay, so then I would go five hours over two days and then maybe a half hour follow up on a week later to make sure that the thing is done. And if there's nothing else necessary, or if it's complete after that, then you're done. If it's complete after that one week, then typically you're done. I personally offer a money-back guarantee on the therapies that I do.

So since 1985, I've offered a no-questions money-back guarantee on all the interventions that I do. So since 1985 I've offered a no questions money back guarantee and all the interventions that I've done and since 1985 I've refunded money for people twice. And I've seen a lot of clients. Now there are some clients with whom I've worked longer than the estimate. So if I had an estimate for a client, like I said I estimate this will take take five hours, and then if it took longer than five hours, I would work with them longer than five hours at no charge.

I have worked with some five-hour clients for up to 30 hours. And I'll talk a little bit, yeah, that is a long period of time. And quite frankly, the impetus is on you to get the job done after about 10 hours there because you're going, I'd sure like to get this done, you know. So I have had some clients with whom, I would say I've had three or four clients who were five-hour clients with whom I worked up to 30 hours at no further charge because I personally estimated that it would take this much time. And it, you know, took longer than that.

So I think that, I like the money back guarantee issue. A lot of people don't do that, but personally I think that, and so that makes it really straightforward for me. So if I go in for two and a half hours, or two hours, and I can't see where to go, when I do a detailed personal history for two hours and I really can't see where to go with this client, I'll say to the client, I don't know where to go. You know, you should see someone else. I mean, I don't know where to go with you on this issue.

A lot of times clients will come in, like I had one client come in and I said, why are you here? And she said, my husband thinks I should change. You know, it was kind of like that sort of thing. So one of the things I'll say is, where's your husband? But I had one client that we didn't find out my husband thinks I should change until three hours into the intervention.

Now, I asked the right questions, but I guess she didn't feel comfortable enough. So after three hours, I said, well, this is couple counseling, so here's what I'll do. We can do this at no charge, and I'll use all the detailed personal history and all the information I've got. And then you need to have your husband come and see me. Because this is obviously two people.

You've got to remember that behavior very rarely occurs in isolation. And in a relationship, it takes two people to create certain behavior. Let's put it this way. A behavior that bugs one person in a relationship is generally created by both parties, to be very straightforward about it. And then so the behavior of kids also very rarely occurs in isolation of the family unit, so that all has to be taken into account.

And we do have an outline of how I do relationships work, and I just want to point that out to you in case you... It's in the advanced patterns of NLP called Family Therapy Model. It's on pages 411, 412, and 413. I don't think we need to necessarily cover it because it's pretty straightforward. You guys can essentially go over it, look at it, and use that.

That's a pretty good outline for working with couples and groups. Any other questions on what you would do, order and sequence of interventions using NLP, sort of along the same subject line. What I want to know is, is it possible if some client comes to you and they've been to somebody else who has put in blockages? Purposefully? Well, I've just heard of a situation recently where that has happened.

You're talking about someone that's been in a cult? No, no, sort of a post-hypnotic suggestion where the new therapist would find it difficult to get through to the client because this blockage has been put. Have you ever experienced that? No, I haven't personally, but I've just heard of a situation where it has happened, and I just wondered if it is possible. If it is possible, yes.

It's possible that someone would do that. It's very rare in this day and age that you'd run into someone like that. So first of all, a couple things just generally. If you're talking about doing work with cults, I don't work with cult. I don't work with people who've been in cult situations.

There are people who are very, very expert at cult situations, and personally I don't choose to do that kind of work. But timeline therapy is very effective in that regard for deprogramming someone who's been in a cult situation. I just don't choose to do that. There are situations that I've heard of, and if you want to, you could read the book by Steve Hassan, H-A-S-S-A-N, and the name of the book is combating cult mind control by steven hassan and i think it's still in print steve uses nlp to deprogram people who've been in cults from time to time i've heard about cult situations where there was a thing put into the unconscious mind of people who were in that sort of situation to not accept deprogramming or therapy. And in the old days, people used to say, I'm the only person who will ever be able to hypnotize you, but Erickson pointed out that it was very, very simple to handle something like that.

If you suspect that someone has, and this is, by the way, in one of the Erickson and Rossi books, I'm not sure which one. There are so many of them it would be. Do you remember which one? Experiencing Hypnotherapy. Experiencing Hypnotherapy.

And Erickson talked about a client who had had a post-hypnotic suggestion not to be hypnotized. So if you suspect something like that, just talk the client back to the post-hypnotic suggestion. So you just say, so there's obviously something at the unconscious level that won't allow you to be hypnotized. And so perhaps you can remember the time when you were hypnotized by that person. And what did he do to hypnotize you?

What did the last therapist do? Or if it's not a therapist, what did that person do to hypnotize you? And how did he or she hypnotize you? And so just question them and ask them to recall the state of being hypnotized. Take them back to the time where the suggestion was installed, and then they'll be in trance and they'll be in rapport with you.

Then you can proceed from that moment forward in that way. There are a number of different techniques also for assisting a client in entering into hypnosis, which we're going to be getting into in this training, which are part of the Deep Trance Phenomena tape set, for those of you listening to the tapes, and I think are recommended. I think you probably ought to have at least three, a minimum of three different ways to induce trance in a client. Because some clients who don't go into trance are not going into trance not because they have been told not to, but simply because the technique is not correct for them. Okay?

So in other words, some techniques of hypnosis work better on some people, and other techniques of hypnosis work better on other people, and there are some people that respond very well to this technique, but not at all to that one, and so forth and so on. So I think having a number of techniques in your sort of grab bag of hypnotic technique or hypnotic phenomena is a good thing to do. Because, essentially, if you're able to induce trance in a number of different ways, then you can suit your induction to the client's needs. So I think the least effective thing would be to play them a phonograph record, as the Hilgards did, and prove that only 80% of people were hypnotizable. I think that would be kind of boring, especially, like, my question, of course, whenever we do hypnosis is, when do you say that's right?

That's right. So, what do you say? The client sits down, and you say, now close your eyes. That's right. But if the client hasn't closed their eyes yet, then what?

So, no, really. I mean, so it's a real question. So I think an induction ought to be individualized. I mean, it ought to be individual for the individual. So I would say, learn a number of hypnotic techniques.

And yes, it is possible for a post-hypnotic suggestion to be installed so the client won't go into trance, but that's very rare. And it's usually not hypnotherapists that do that, it's usually hypnotists. And oftentimes those hypnotists are just having fun or doing it for other reasons. This is the end of Tape 22, Side B.