# Quatum Nature Of The Nervous System, Quantum Linguistics, Presuppositions

So let's now talk about quantum linguistics, and we're returning to page one in section number two. So think about this for just a minute as we're about to embark on our language section. By the way, language forms the basis for all of our NLP techniques because it's how we communicate. We cover language first because it's how we're going to communicate with each other. And even though it's only 7%, remember from your practitioner training, even as though it's 7%, there are ways that we can communicate with other people that will fit into the quantum nature of who we are.

And if we use our language in a way which is quantum, what will happen is we'll actually make changes with the client in a way that affects the neurology, in a way that actually changes the neurology and makes a difference at the neurological level. And the way we do this is by affecting the boundaries of the neurological pattern. We do this by affecting the boundaries of the neurological pattern. So let me give you some theory first. As we move into quantum linguistics, we're looking at wall chart number five.

Imagine this piece of paper, as you look at wall chart number five, imagine this piece of paper is totally blank. Now, on your diagram on wall chart number five, there's a set of boundaries there already, but imagine for a moment that the wall chart is totally blank. What we're going to suggest is, and this is based on the work of Dr. Paul Goodwin, what we're going to suggest is that something which constitutes a problem for beginning discussion, something that constitutes a problem will set up a set of boundary conditions inside the neurology. That is to say that there will be some boundaries that exist because that problem has set them up neurologically inside of the holographic nature of the neural networks.

One of the things that, one of the things we're going to do in quantum linguistics is we're actually going to either expand the boundaries, we'll actually take and expand the boundaries or cause them to disappear through some of the processes that we're about to do. So I want to point that out as we begin, and a lot of what we'll be doing is moving in the direction of changing boundaries that constitute problems from a neurological point of view, or moving outside of a client's ability to experience or to comprehend something that we're doing. For example, have you ever done parts integration? And when the client is chunking up, chunking up, chunking up, they get to a point where you can experience that the client themselves is not at a very high level of abstraction, but they have trouble going any higher in terms of the chunking. Have you all experienced that when you did?

Yes. Yeah, parts integration. So you'll say, this behavior for what purpose, you'll say, this behavior for what purpose, this behavior for what purpose, this behavior for what purpose, and they'll get to maybe, like maybe they'll say protection, or maybe they'll say safety or something like that. And have you ever noticed that some clients, they can't seem to get beyond that right away? It takes them a few minutes or some time of patiently asking, what's this an example of or for what purpose, until they actually move outside of that boundary condition.

What we've had there is we've had the part, the part itself, with a condition where it was impossible for the client to conceive of the higher level generalization because there was a sort of, as it were, a boundary around the ability to conceive that. Okay, if you think of the entire neurology as being, when we're born, without boundaries, and if the entire, if the neurology actually reflects the entire universe, then that would probably be a better direction to move in. So we're going to come back to this several times. I wanted to lay that out as we begin our notion of quantum linguistics. We're on page two, one, and we're also on slide number 16.

There's a number of things which are involved in quantum linguistics that we're about to talk about. The first is presuppositions, and there's two purposes for presuppositions. Most everyone here has had presuppositions occurring in natural language because you've attended. How many people have never taken the, not the presuppositions of NLP, but the presuppositions in natural language? How many people have never had any training in that?

If you took our practitioner training, you had that. This is a test. Oh, good. Okay. All right.

So there's two purposes for presuppositions, and let me just, this is review. The presuppositions are the equivalent of linguistic assumptions. In other words, they're the things that we assume by our language. There's two things you can do. You can recognize the assumptions of your client's speech, or you can use presuppositions directly to affect someone's internal representations.

Remember that the major thing about presuppositions are it doesn't matter if they're positive or negative, the internal representation is the same. And the example is don't think of a blue tree. What are you thinking of? Blue tree. You say to the client, I don't want you to think it'll be easy to change.

The client's thinking, it's easy to change. Don't sit in that chair, it's the trance chair, look out. Or here's even a better one that's even more subtle than that. Erickson used to say, don't go into a trance right away because I need to talk to you. Fabulous.

Okay, the next thing that you've already had is the hierarchy of ideas. The hierarchy of ideas essentially says that the level of abstraction of your language does make a difference. There are two purposes of the hierarchy of ideas. One is to chunk up to gain greater agreement in trance. The other is to chunk down for greater distinctions, to bring people out of trance.

And you can control the level of abstraction of the conversation using your language and the Metta or Milton model. And quantum linguistics essentially are the way we directionalize language in order to allow it to follow the quantum nature of the human nervous system. And the purpose of this is to create change neurologically by using directionalized language. So let's review presuppositions for just a moment. You've probably seen the list of presuppositions on page 2-2.

You've probably seen these presuppositions on page 2.2, I think. The first category is presuppositions of existence. What is the definition of presupposition? We already said it's linguistic assumptions. It's what's assumed by your client's language.

Remember, there's two parts to it. One is to listen, to be able to hear it, noticing it. The other is to be able to utilize it and create change. This is review for most everyone, but since some of you have not taken your practitioner training for a while, let's go through them. I want to give you the tip-offs, since you've probably already had some sort of training in this.

I want to give you the tip-offs for recognizing each of these patterns. Okay, this is the tip-off. This is the tip-off for recognizing each of these patterns. The first is a presupposition of existence. The tip-off is nouns.

So anytime you hear a noun, you have a presupposition of existence. Even if it's a nominalization, which also acts as a noun, we're still dealing with presupposition of existence. Presuppositions of possibility or necessity are tipped off by what? Modal operators. Modal operators.

So anytime you hear a modal operator, that gives you an idea of presuppositions of possibility or necessity. Cause and effect. Cause and effect. What are tip-offs for cause and effect? The word because.

Any derivative of the verb to make. Anything where he makes me, she makes me. Cause and effect. Also, any implied causative, such as if-then. Or if, without the then.

Those are all tip-offs for cause and effect. What's the tip-off for complex equivalence? The tip-off for complex equivalence is the verb to be. Any derivative of the verb to be is. Anytime the two things are equated as being equivalent, such even in the word means, so that means she looks at me a certain way, that means she doesn't like me.

The tip-off for a presupposition of awareness is any verb that relates to any of the senses. To see, to hear, to feel. Also, to be aware of. To wonder. Such wonderful words as wonder.

And I wonder if you can realize. Those are all presuppositions of awareness. Number six, time. All verbs have a tense. So all verb tense is presuppositional with regards to time.

This has a lot to do with quantum linguistics. We're going to talk about time with regards to quantum linguistics, but think about it for a moment. If a client comes to you and says, I have a problem, you can say, what was your problem? What was your problem? And of course, one of the things I like to do with clients when I say, what was your problem, is I like to stack it a little bit, just a little bit.

Just a little bit. So I go, like, what was your problem, which, when you go out in the future and think about having changed now, that it will seem like it was always that way. So take them out in the future, add resources, slam it back into now. Kind of fun. But, you know, like I was doing a timeline therapy demonstration in a two-day training, and somebody walked up after I did this really nice intervention, and they said to the demo subject, they said, well, how was that timeline therapy?

And you know that problem you had, how is it now? Do you have it now? Is it there now? I think that's the wrong question. Unless, of course, you want the client to come back next week.

In which case, you could future pay some coming back. No, I'm just kidding. That is a joke. Yes, it is. It is a joke, I promise.

So, some of my other favorites in terms of presuppositions of time are the word now, of course, and one of my other favorites,ient thinks, client says, I don't think I've changed. You go, that's right, not yet. You don't think you've changed yet. Implying, of course, you will change. And stop.

Stop's one of my favorites. Don't tell the client what to stop, by the way. You say, if you could, would you just stop? And then you tell them what to do. Which brings us, since we're talking about time, to slide number 19, which is essentially that change is the order and sequence of the internal representations that you make inside of your head.

We'll see this when we get to modal operators. We're going to do some work with, some quantum linguistic work with modal operators. That's really fun. Okay, so change is the order and sequence of internal representations. Make sure your sequencing is temporally appropriate.

Okay, adjectives and adverbs. An adjective modifies a noun, right? You know that. An adverb modifies a verb. So you say, I'm not sure John realized how easy it is to change.

The nice thing about adjective-adverb presuppositions when you're using them with a client is you can actually displace resistance using them. You can displace resistance by using adjective-adverb modifiers with a client because they could focus on, I'm not sure John realized how easy it was to change. They can focus on the ease of it, nevertheless accepting the fact that John has changed. That's interesting. So, an adjective-adverb modifier is extremely useful to shift the attention of the client in a certain direction and also to displace resistance.

The other thing is when you're recognizing adjective-adverb modifiers, you want to pay attention to words that are seemingly out of place. Like they interviewed this one guy on television. He says, I'm totally innocent. Why would he have to use the word totally with regards to innocent? What if they interviewed a woman on TV?

She said, I'm not totally pregnant. Are you a little pregnant? Let's talk about exclusive ors and inclusive ors. Wall chart number six. The interesting thing about an exclusive and inclusive or, or actually the thing about an or combination is, what you usually have is this or that.

One is this, and two could be that. What's not immediately obvious about an OR combination is that there's another universe outside of that. So, if we do this or that, we're including one and two, but excluding everything that's outside of that. I think diagrammatically that's the way to think about exclusive and inclusive ORs. That's, by the way, the basis of double binds.

Exclusive and inclusive ORs are the basis of double binds. So using them is one way to create a lot of creative choice for a client. Most clients who you see will have, not most, many clients who you see will have an OR construction where they think they have to have this or that. They don't realize they can have both. The ores are one of the things that limit us, so make sure your ores are both inclusive and exclusive personally.

But remember that you can also use exclusive ores with your clients if you need to. And then the last thing we're going to cover is ordinal, which is a list. The tip-off for ordinal presupposition is anything that implies a list, like first or last. Next, first, second, third, fourth, fifth are all ordinals. Okay, if you're listening to the tapes now, would you please turn to page 2-3 and follow the instructions on page 2-3 as to what to write in those blanks if you've never seen these.

If you're going to do this exercise, please stop the tape now. Go ahead and stop the tape and do the exercise. And since most of you have seen this exercise, let's just go through and look and see what the answers should be. I think you all have done this, right, in your practitioner training. I want to go through it once again and review it because we're about to do some work with presuppositions this afternoon.

So just so you have them in your mind. These are actual client utterances. So the first one is, I'm not sure whether or not I should stop beating my wife. Does this person have a wife? Yeah, so that's a presupposition.

So next to A, put a P. How do you know the person has a wife? By the way, the way you know whether something is presupposed in a sentence is because the word is in the sentence. It's pretty simple. There are some implied presuppositions.

We're going to get down lower on in the numbers here, number four or five. There are some implied presuppositions, but typically, if something's in the sentence, you can be pretty sure it's definitely a presupposition. So B, he loves his wife, is what? It's a mind read because the word love does not appear in the sentence. C, he currently beats his wife.

Presupposition or mind read? And D. He's a low life slob who should be shot. True, right? But it's a mind read.

True. I don't see why I can't do it. All my friends are doing it. A. He feels he's being treated unfairly.

Mind read. B. He wants to be liked by his friends. Just look and see if the verb to like is in there at all. The answer is it's not.

So it's a mind read that he wants to be liked by his friends. C, this person's friends do something he doesn't do. Yes, all my friends are doing it. Verb to do implies that or tells us that. Yes.

So C is a presupposition. And D, all his friends are bums who should be shot. That's a mind read. Okay. Number three, if I don't learn how to communicate with my boss, I won't get a raise.

A, does this person feel powerless? Mind read. B, he doesn't know how to communicate with the boss. It's actually a presupposition. The word communicate is in there.

C, he wants to learn new behaviors. I want to warn you in advance, by the way, that this is a very close one. This is a close to call one. I could argue the point either way. Let's just say that we don't know if this person wants to learn new behaviors, but we do know that he connects his salary to his communication skills.

So that's definitely a, that's definitely a presupposition number D, right? You with me on that? So, so C is a mind read. Because we don't know if he wants to or not. He may not want to learn how to communicate with his boss, but he might want to raise.

Right? Number four, I have to stop making unrealistic expectations. A, this person can't stop. Sorry, I have to set up unrealistic expectations. A, this person can't stop.

By the way, this is another close one. Let me just tell you. My point of view is that it's a presupposition. The words have to, which is modal operator, implies can't stop. Being a modal operator of necessity, client feels he's out of control of it.

But I want you to know I also believe it could very well be a mind read. B, this person feels trapped, is definitely a mind read, right? C, he has expectations. Presuppositions, right. We don't know if they're realistic or unrealistic.

In fact, we're not sure if he has realistic expectations, but we do know that he has expectations. And D, he knows when he's being unrealistic. No, the word actually appears there, unrealistic, so we're going to say that he knows. Oh, he may not know he's being realistic. He may not know when he's being realistic, but I think he knows when he's being unrealistic because the word is there.

So D is a presupposition. Number five, I'm feeling much better now. I can see how some of the things I was doing just made me unhappy. A, Some behavior he engaged in was related to some internal state. That's definitely a presupposition, yeah.

B. He has feelings. Unusual, but it's presupposition, yeah. C. He has much more control of his life now.

Mind read, definitely. D, he fixed himself so he shouldn't be shot. True, but definitely a mind read. Okay, let's look at page 2-4. If you're doing this on the tape and this is the first time you've seen this, please go ahead and do this exercise.

What we're going to identify in the class here is we're going to identify the major presuppositions inherent in each of these sentences. While you could go through, and I think it's a good exercise if you all haven't done this, is to go through and pick out every single presupposition in here and identify them. But for purposes of what we're talking about here, we're going to look for the major construct, the major construction of the sentence. So, if you're going to do the exercise, stop the tape now and do the exercise. Please go ahead and stop the tape now.

Let's find out the major construction in each of these sentences in terms of presuppositions. If the cat meows again, I'll have to put him outside. Is what? Cause and effect. By the way, for those of you who just joined us, I'd like to point out, the question is, and you don't get to answer if you just heard this last week, I'd like to point out, is the cat male or female?

Now, see, we actually don't know. The truth is we don't know. Thanks, Lauren, for pointing that out. Of course, you already heard this, I think. We don't know if the cat's male or female.

What if it was her husband? Let's drop that in and see how that works. If the cat meows again, I'll have to put my husband outside. That works, doesn't it? It does.

Some people in the back are going, yes, it definitely does. I'll tell you what, I'm going to put him out right now. We don't know if the cat's male, necessarily. Number two, what is the construct here? Was her friendly smile that made me walk up and say hi?

Cause and effect. Cause and effect, the verb to make. Number three, if only he'd gotten home on time, the party wouldn't have gotten out of control. Ah, here's the tip-off. You ready?

If. It's an if-then without the then again. It's the same construct as number one, so it's definitely a cause and effect. If only he'd come home on time, if then the party wouldn't have gotten out of control. The major construct is cause and effect.

Number four. The major construction of number four now, not the minor ones, is what? To me, it's the word always, isn't it? To me, it's always, and so it's a presupposition of time. Yep.

Number five. Ah, here we go, those of you who are Complex Equivalence fans. His easygoing personality is good PR for our company, is being the tip-off for cause and effect? What's the major construct in number six? Is it?

I kind of like to think it would be, but I don't think it is. It's not really time. Actually, unless you're talking about stopwatching over your shoulder, which means you hold a stopwatch over your shoulder and click it furiously. Click, click, click, click, click, click, click, click. I'm kidding about that.

What is the... So what is this? Awareness. Sure. Don't you think the major presupposition here is awareness?

A person's watching over your shoulder. Awareness. Yeah? Presupposition of awareness. Watching.

As in the verb to see. Number seven. Major presupposition. Only you can learn this. What is this?

Well, possibility. I like that. Yeah, that's a good one. There's one more that I like even better, though. It's an exclusive without the or.

This is going to say, you know, has both oars in the water, has one or in the water. This one has no ors in the water. Only you can learn this. It's an exclusive without the or. I love it.

Number eight, either she goes to the store or I do. Construct. Exclusive or. Number nine, first the winds came, then the rain. Don't let that then fool you.

It's not cause and effect. What is it? Ordinal. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's ordinal.

And number ten, opera makes me want to cry. That's true. Cause and effect. Verb to make. Yep.

Okay, so some people ask me, some people ask me, how do you do embedded commands? I think we need to know that before we move on to do our first exercise. We're going to do our first exercise shortly, but not yet. Because there's still some things we need to talk about, but I want to talk about how to deliver embedded commands. I, it took me a long time to get this information out of anybody.

But there was a guy who I was friends with who worked in the Pentagon who actually tested this on generals. He did, he really did. His name was Bob Klaus. Bob said he tested embedded commands on generals and the one that seemed to work was this one. So he said there's two elements in an embedded command that works.

You have to spend at least two words on the means, that is how to do it, and one word on the end, which is what you want them to do. At least one word, and possibly more. And the key is to have three presuppositions in a single sentence. So we need to have at least three presuppositions in a single sentence. We're looking at section 2, page 5, by the way.

Three presuppositions in a single sentence. So we need to have at least three presuppositions in a single sentence. We're looking at page, section two, page five, by the way. Three presuppositions in a single sentence. Two words, at least two words of how to do it and one word of what to do.

For example, so I'm wondering if you can stand up, go to the door, and close it. Okay, so stand up, go to the door. Stand up, go to the door, preset, and close it. Here are the steps to developing an embedded command. And this is all going to be part of what we do.

I'd like you to practice this. Try this, it's fun. Notice what kind of results you can get. Okay, so the steps are, first of all, decide your outcome, develop the sentence, number two, and then deliver it. Whoa.

Open your mouth and go, blah. And then calibrate for results. You do need to deliver the sentence congruently. So that's just a rule of thumb, and this, this thing, this, this thing of doing embedded commands, I'd like you to practice it. I'm not going to suggest you know how to do it now.

I'm not going to suggest you can do it now. I'm not going to suggest you've heard me do it for a long time. And so you can remember that. All I'm going to suggest is that as you think about it, you may find yourself doing it automatically without even having to think about it. You'll do it.

And then you may just all of a sudden go, whoa, wait a minute, I just did an embedded command. And I didn't even mean to. Ah, is that what, is the same thing as I said I told you so? I will tell you so now, and then you can, if you'd like to, yes. I will tell you so, that I told you so.

Is that so? All right. What I'd like you to practice the next couple of days is just begin to think about embedded commands all the time and practice them that way. Not necessarily do it here in class, but to think about it and realize you can do it and then do it here in class. Okay.

This is the end of Tape 3, Side B.