# Logical Levels Of Therapy, Strategy Elicitation

Hey, welcome back. How was that exercise? Did you guys do good? Yeah, logical levels of therapy is a lot of fun, isn't it? What kind of questions or comments do you have?

Any questions? Or comments? Yes. Okay. When you get to the end and you've blown it all out and they still go, you know, you can still reaccess it, what's the next thing you do?

It depends. You may not have run the submodalities out to the limit enough times. So you might go back and do it again. Or if, I mean, you can just go right into timeline therapy. Logical levels of therapy doesn't always work, but my guess is it will sufficiently loosen up the model so that the client will not have a firm hold on it as much.

So you could go on and do timeline therapy. Logical levels of therapy is really good, in my opinion, for loosening up the model, loosening up the client's model in order, loosening up the problem, the hold on the problem so that it disappears. And it's really effective for behavior. Now, my thing for behavior, my question for behavior is how do you know when you're done, right? Because I want the client to know they're done.

And I don't know if you've ever done work with clients, but the clients come in and they go, you know, I got this problem. And you go, okay, here's what we're going to do. And you do it, and then they get all done. They go, yeah, well, the therapy was nice, but I don't know if we're done. Well, logical levels of therapy lets you know you're done because the client has to do it in the room and either they can do it or they can't do it.

And if they can't do it, you're done. But if you're not done, then you could go back and redo it again. Could go back and work on it again. Or just go on to something else. You could also do a pattern interrupt on the strategy.

I mean, fall on the floor and froth at the mouth. Did you? You did? All right. Good behavioral flexibility.

Good job. You could do a pattern interrupt. You could anchor it. You could also anchor the strategy overtly rather than covertly and add that in. And, of course, one of the things I do is whenever the client, whenever we're doing, like, the logical levels, if we have fun, then we get laughter anchored in.

You get the anchor of laughter anchored in, and then the client's laughing about it, then they're going to run the strategy and laugh. Every time they try to run it, they'll laugh, and that certainly is going to change the behavior, too. So those are the things that I do. If it's something that they use to relieve stress, should there be something else that you should anchor in instead? Sure, that's what we did with Susan.

We had to, you know, I said, like, is there anything else you want to do? What would you rather do? What would you rather do instead? You know, something like that. So if the client is using it to reduce stress or whatever, then you've got, I think no matter what, you may want to give them another behavior.

That's the question I asked is right at the very beginning when we were doing, you know, the outcome, sort of outcome definition is, what would you like to do instead? Whenever a client comes to you and says, I produced a behavior, I think you need to ask, what do you want to do instead? That has been covered in your questioning section of your practitioner training. Thanks for asking. Which is on the practitioner tape set called Keys to Achievable Outcome.

That's the first one on the practitioner tape set. As well as well-formanous conditions for outcomes on the practitioner tape set. So knowing that, you can go back and review those two things if you're listening to the tapes and you want more information on that. Because you want to define it up front. And of course, what we're looking for is the definition of an outcome that is self-initiated and all those things in the outcome definitions.

First step is achievable, all that stuff. You remember that. When do you have them do it? Identify the problem, and then you have them run the problem, get in touch with the staff. Okay, so when do you have them do it?

The first time, yeah. Do you do it before you say, how do you do it, or? I'd like to know somewhere at the moment of how do you do it, right? At the moment of how do you do it, I'd like to know somewhere along the way that the client can do it. So it's either before how do you do it, because they're going to have to, see, it's most easy to get the behavior if the client does it for you, right?

So somewhere right at how do you do it or right at the strategy elicitation, somewhere right there, it's best to say to the client, can you do it now? Right? So it's not exactly at that very, very moment, but it could be, it should be, I think, somewhere before how do you do it. Now, some clients will just go right in and say, you say, how do you do it? And they'll go, well, I make a picture.

And some clients won't. They'll go, how do I do it? What do you mean? And then you have to say, well, can you do it now? Doesn't that also put them at cause without them realizing it?

Sure. That's the whole thing about second step. Here's an example of taking a behavior to the limit. This was really fun. This was a while back now, I have to admit.

I think this client called me around 1984, and he calls me on the phone and he goes, I'm freaking out, I'm freaking out, I'm freaking out, I got some bad dope. And I went, whoa. Because I don't want to deal with that. So I thought, oh, is this, so I said to him, is it cocaine or marijuana? Because if it had been cocaine, I would have said go to the hospital.

But he said, no, it's marijuana. I said, was there anything else in it? He said, no, just marijuana. So I said, great. Well, I said, here's the deal.

A lot of people call me on the phone and try to fool me. And it was 2 o'clock in the morning. I don't do well at 2 o'clock. You guys know. I've told you this before.

I said, listen, is this a real freak out? He says, I'm really freaking out. I said, is this a real freak out or not? I said, because I don't know if I believe you. He said, no, this is a real freak out.

I said, well, if it's a real freak out. See, we're setting up the double mind. If it's a real freak out, I said, then you'll be able to increase the symptoms. He goes, huh? I said, yeah, increase the symptoms.

He goes, I can't do that. I said, is this a real freak out or not? I mean, either you're freaking out or you're really freaking out or you're really not freaking out. Is this a real freak out? And he goes, uh, uh, I don't know.

I said, well, if it is, increase the symptoms. Increase the symptoms now. And he goes, you know, they're reducing themselves. And then I went a little nuts. I said, this isn't a real freakout.

What are you doing? He said, the symptoms are going less and less. I said, what do you mean? What do you mean? What are you calling me at 2 o'clock in the morning?

He said, they're gone. I said, okay, call me in the morning. Click. Now, think about it for a minute. Is that a double bind?

If you ask the client to increase the symptoms, what happens if they increase the symptoms? Who's in charge? Client's in charge. If you ask the client to reduce the symptoms, and let's say they mismatch you. Let's say you say increase the symptoms and they mismatch you.

Who's in charge? The client. So it's a double bind. The client's in charge of the symptoms no matter what. It's the same thing with step three and four on page 235.

It's the same thing. The client is going to be in charge of the behavior. So this whole thing is a bind in that it does cause and effect. It's a really nice, unobtrusive, non-invasive sort of bind, and kind of fun, where the client is actually put totally in charge of the behavior. What they should end up with is at least an understanding they don't have to run it if they don't want to.

At best, the behavior will be scrambled sufficiently they won't run again. Yes, question? How do you determine what warrants more therapy once you're finished with this? Let's see. When I'm doing an intervention with a client, I usually do a detailed personal history.

Now, if it's a minor problem, the detailed personal history could be as little as an hour and a half or a half an hour. If it's a major problem, then we're going to take up to two, two and a half hours of a detailed personal history. I'm very much in favor of that. So I want to know as much about the client as I can. And I think Erickson said, the more you know about the client, the more you can tailor your intervention to him or her.

So I'm going to take a detailed personal history. And that's on the, thanks for asking, on the Master Practitioner tape set. It's in the Master Practitioner tape set, how to do that. So let's say, so there's two possibilities. One is a detailed personal history, how would I know I'm done?

And the other is no detailed personal history, how would I know I'm done? Detailed personal history, how I know I'm done is I'm going to take notes. I'm going to take pages and pages of notes, maybe two or three pages, maybe one page handwritten, maybe two or three pages handwritten. And every time I hear a negative emotion or a limiting decision, I'll write it down. Every time I hear a behavior, I'll write it down.

Every time I hear something that indicates a part, I'll write it down. If I think a strategy intervention is necessary, I'll write that down. If I think submodalities, I'll do a little, I'll make a little submodality SMD, you know, thing. And then I just go back down the paper and check off everything until it's done. And when I look across at the client, if I notice some negative emotion, then I'll also write that down.

Okay? And then we'll do that. Then I know I'm done when I'm, when I finish everything on the paper and then I'll future paste the client and I'll say, I'm not going to make any suggestions. You heard me do this on the tape set, this tape set previously. I'll say, I'm not going to make any suggestions.

You heard me do this on this tape set previously. I'll say, I'm not going to make any suggestions, but when you go out in the future, what's happening instead? If the client cannot, without my suggesting, a detailed, rich map of what's happening, if the client cannot imagine themselves in the future behaving differently, then we're not done. Then we may need to install it, or we may need to do more timeline therapy. Okay?

Okay, so let's say we have a client who I've not taken a detailed personal history with, but I've done just a couple minutes like right here. As I look across at the client, if I perceive that the client has some negative emotion that needs to also be handled, I would look at the client and I'd go, what are you feeling? And if the client said, oh, I'm feeling good, then we'd probably be done. And if the client said, no, I'm not feeling good, then I would say, okay, what's the emotion? And we'd do timeline therapy for it.

Or we might need to do a strategy intervention. Or in the case of, like, you're using logical levels for a phobia, you probably would want to do the phobia intervention also. If you're doing logical levels of therapy, you probably would want to do at least, in addition to the logical levels, you'd want to do also a phobia intervention, I think. And then any behavior, you may want to do anchoring or whatever you need to do in addition to that. This is often sufficient alone, but most usually needs other things to go along with it.

So you may do anchoring or strategy. or whatever, or timeline therapy. And then finally, again, the final test for me is future pace. Does the client experience themselves doing different behaviors? As they go out in the future and think about it, are the behaviors different? Yeah?

Okay. My question was, when my client, James, was discussing his things with me, what he was saying and the eye patterns he was using were really different. Different from what? From each other. From each other?

He would say he was feeling, and he'd access visual remembered, or recall. And he would never say anything about auditory, but he accessed that a lot, so I finally asked him, and it didn't seem to be very important, but he thought maybe he'd say to himself he wanted another one. But so often he'd talk about feeling, it was cake. So often he'd talk about feeling and he would be accessing visual recall. And I just didn't know what to think about all that.

Okay, so it's a good thing we're moving into strategies, isn't it? Because we're moving right now, we're moving into strategy elicitation. My guess is your question will be answered as we get into that, but let me answer your question interimly so you'll have an interim answer. That's probably the difference between the lead representational system and the primary rep system. Remember, the lead representational system is where the client goes to access the information, and the primary representational system is the predicates they use to represent it.

So if a client's giving you different predicates from the Ins, they may be accessing different, they may have a different lead and a different primary rep. Or the client may be, the I-patterns themselves may be accessing the information and may not represent the strategy. And so the clients, what you're seeing is the lead, and one of the things you have to do when you elicit a strategy from I patterns is you have to separate out the lead, that is where they go to get the information, from the strategy itself. Or, this is the third thing, or it's also possible that you're not seeing the lead, but you're just seeing the strategy, in which case the question would be, why don't the predicates match? And again, that would be different lead from different rep.

So they're going to primary rep it, which is predicates and physiology. That's the primary rep system. And the eye patterns are the lead, right? Now, some people may also have a kinesthetic lead. So some people have to check their feelings first or get into their feelings or move their body in a certain way to access.

So all of those are possible. All of those are possible. And we don't know, but one of the neat things about eliciting strategies is you've got to get to a point where that isn't an issue. That is to say, you're noticing what it is and you're getting it very easily. Okay.

Other questions about logical levels of therapy? Perfect, because we're moving on to strategies. We're moving right along to strategies, and we're going to work with chapter 8. We're going to start with page 8. 1. What is a strategy?

I'm looking at slide number 90. A strategy is what we do inside of our head when we do something. And it's the order and sequence of internal and external representations that produce a specific result. It's a syntax. It's a syntax of external and internal experience.

The fact is that human experience is an endless series of representations, and probably more is going on at the same time. I mean, the truth is that we're probably accessing all of V, A, K, O, G, and A, D at the same time. But a strategy is, um, allows us to sort of suspend the process. A strategy sort of allows us to take the process and find out which one of the representational systems is being emphasized at the moment, because we have V-A-K-O-G-A-Ds happening all at the same time. But which one of them is being more paid attention to?

Which of V-A-K-O-G-A-D is the client paying more attention to? And so strategy elicitation is essentially, think about this for a minute, since we're doing strategies all the time for every behavior we do, and it's running, running, running all the time, our strategies are going on in our head, and all the time we're doing stuff, what we have to do is we have to, we have to sort of suspend the process or take a movie of it for just a short period of time or ask the client to recall it for that short period of time so that we can, we can really are. And there are a number of different components. If you look at page 8.1, the first step, and we're looking at slide 91, but the same information is on both. The first step is to discover the person's strategy through the process of detection or elicitation.

If you change, by the way, the first of the components to detection, or you might want to add the word detection there. For those of you who are going to take the trainer's training, this will give you a good way of studying the four major things that we do with strategies because it makes a mnemonic, which is D-U-C-I, which is ducky. Okay, so the first step is detection or elicitation. Some people like mnemonics, so we're assisting the, that'll help you remember the things we do with strategies. The first thing is detection or elicitation.

The second thing is utilization. So we utilize the strategy to feed it back to the person. We feed it back in the same order and sequence that it was elicited. The next step is to be able to change the strategy. So we want to be able to make changes in the strategy so it produces the desired outcome.

We're actually going to get into strategy change and installation. The final thing we want to do is we may need to install a new strategy, either change the strategy or actually install a brand new strategy for someone if we need to. Okay, so as we mentioned earlier, just about everything we do is controlled by strategies or that there is a strategy that occurs when we do it. Let's look at page 8.2. In the book Plans and the Structure of Behavior, published in 1960 by Miller, Galanter, and Prebram, they talked about the TOTE model.

The TOTE model on page 8.2 was essentially... Actually, the Miller, Galanter, and Prebram had a TOTE model of test, organized, test, exit. But when the TOTE model made it over to NLP, it became test operate test exit. And what essentially happens is, in any given strategy, first thing that happens is that there's a beginning test, or something happens, or there's a comparison, or there's something that occurs, which sets up the conditions for the second test, which is those two circles. So as we enter the strategy at the very left top hand side of your diagram on page 82, we enter the strategy, we begin by setting up a test or setting up the test conditions which we test at the end.

And then we... But the other thing is that this first test is a trigger. There's some sort of a trigger mechanism, which we would also call anchoring, or some sort of an anchor, which feeds forward the information for the test to occur when we hit the second test. And then somewhere in here, in the operation phase, somewhere here in the operation phase, we're going to access data by either remembering, creating, or gathering it from the external world. So we're either going to access or gather some data.

And then at the very end of the strategy, we're going to test it again to see if it met the criteria or some comparison of the data which was accessed at the very beginning to see if both of these match, and if we match, then oftentimes we'll get a successful exit. If they don't actually match, what will happen is we'll actually go back to somewhere in the operation. The exit is, or in the second test, I guess I should say, is a comparison of some aspect of the access data, some comparison. And the two things, by the way, the two things compared need to be represented in the same representational system. That is to say that the information fed forward probably is going to be the same information that we access at the end.

And then finally the exit, which is a decision point or choice point, which is right at the final end of the, or right in the middle of the diamond there, will either exit, which will be a successful strategy if there's a match. If there's no match, then the strategy may recycle and may go back into somewhere in the operation point. The strategy can recycle by either the client changing the outcome, or we can adjust the criteria or chunk laterally, or redefining or further specifying the outcome, or by accessing more data, which essentially says, if you are looking at our diagram of our line, squares, circle, and diamond, that when we go back into the earlier parts, we can either go back here and reset up the test information, so we can go from the exit all the way back to the first test and change the test criteria, or we can go back from the exit into the operation and gather more data or more information, or we can go back from the exit and go back into the test and perhaps even maybe even change the test or specify different data. Okay, so those are all the things that are possible. Let's look at page 8.3.

There are two things we look at when we elicit strategies. The first is we look at the elements in the strategy, and we look at the sequence. And here's a list of all the things we could possibly do. Can you imagine that? This is all the things we could possibly do in a strategy.

We could have visual, external, or internal. The internal could be constructed or remembered, and that's for visual, auditory, and kinesthetic, except that kinesthetic could also have or remembered, and also proprioceptive information, tactile or meta information. Proprioceptive means what? Internal feelings. Tactile means sensations.

And meta means feeling about something. Right? Very simple. And olfactory and gustatory can have internal, external, and external, internal, and internal can be constructed or remembered. Really simple.

This is just a list of all the possible elements in a strategy. Yes? You're having difficulty, you said, Joe, determining which is feelings. Proprioceptive is feelings. Yeah.

Proprioceptive. Tactile is external sensations. Meta is I'm not, I'm feeling about the situation. Let's see. So I'm feeling happy.

That's proprioceptive. And meta is just a further distinction because we have a diagrammatic sort of piece for that. Meta is a further distinction, and meta essentially says, gee, Bill's unhappy, and I see that. I see Bill. He's unhappy, so I'm unhappy.

Okay, so it's sort of a meta comment to the situation. Different from just, you know, I played golf and I made a nice chip shot onto the green, so I'm happy. So meta would be, I saw Jack Nicklaus do a nice chip shot on the green and he was happy and that made me happy. So that's meta. Meta is just whatever the situation is, I'm happy about that.

I'm happy for, generally for another person, but it could be I'm not feeling bad but I'm feeling bad about the situation I'm in. It could be that way. So you're talking to people, and as you reflect on the fact that you have to talk, like someone who doesn't like selling, here's an example. Someone who doesn't like selling has to go out and talk to people, and the reason they don't like to do that is because they don't like to talk to people, right? So they wouldn't feel bad about selling, but they would feel, they would have a meta sort of comment on that or a meta feeling about that in that, you know, I wish I didn't have to be in this situation because if I didn't have to earn enough money, then I wouldn't have to be in this situation.

That would be a meta feeling about the entire situation rather than being a direct feeling about it. Do you understand? Meta probably is often proprioceptive, or if not always proprioceptive. But it's just another distinction we make in strategies because when we get to writing them down on page 815, so as you look at page 815, as we get to writing them down, those are all the little marks that we can make in the diagrams. When we're notating the strategy, page 815 has all of those notations.

And if you'll notice, about partway down the page, there's a diagram for making a meta meta. So there's a diagram for that right there on page 815 this section implies that you have read the whole strategy section so what we're going to be we're going to be actually moving along on our master practitioner tape set here because everyone in the room here has and if you haven't as you breathe into this strategy section please go ahead and read section 8 page 16 all the way to the end of the section please read page 16 all the way to the end of the section so you can go ahead and read up on what we're about to cover. Because I'm going to assume that as we go through this that people in the class have read all of that. And we're going to sort of do an open frame on strategies before we actually get into the elicitation of it. So what we've got is we've got something that occurs, it triggers the beginning of the strategy, there's a test that's fed forward into an operation, there's a test and then an exit.

Or to put it another way, something happens, which is usually a trigger, and at some point the person finds they're producing the behavior. Somewhere between the trigger and the behavior, we go through a number of different operations, or a number of different representational systems, or a number of different things that we do with comparisons and so forth, and we finally end up doing the behavior. So what we've done in NLP, essentially, is we've just said, okay, what are the V-A-K-O-G and A-D, what are all those things that, when we look at it, then how can we find out what the person does? Because finding out what the person does, we can actually change it. So that's how a strategy works.

And the first thing we want to do is we want to discover how to elicit a strategy. There's a number of different ways of eliciting a strategy, but let's begin at the beginning. If you look at page 813, and I'm going to assume, by the way, that you've read pages 8.4 through 8.12, in addition to the information in the back of this section, starting at 8.16 and going all the way to the back of this section, there's a text for a formal strategy elicitation on page 813. My recommendation is that you learn it, that you memorize it so that you can say, without even having to blink an eye, remember a time when you were totally X, remember specific times, you go back to that time now, float down in your body, see what you saw, hear what you heard, feel what you felt, just feel the feelings of being totally X. And as you do that, what was the very first thing that happened to cause you to know you were totally X?

Was it something you saw, something you heard or touched or something? You need to know it that well so that you don't have to think about it because you're looking at the client. You want to do it that well so when you're looking at the client, you can be looking at the client. Because I'll tell you, even though we're going to learn how to elicit strategies from eye patterns, and I'm going to do the best I can as we work with this client up here to share that with those of you who are listening to the tape set. Even though we know that we're going to elicit strategies from eye patterns with our client, the fact is that some clients, when they do their strategies, go like this.

They close their eyes, and then they move their eyes around, and they open their eyes, and they go, well, and they're into the behavior. Some folks wear dark glasses, just to confound you, but let me just tell you that I have seen an NLP, an NLP trainer, who can elicit strategies by watching the micro muscle movements at the back of someone's head. So, in other words, this trainer was standing behind the client and told me what the strategy was? Accurately. So what I want you to know is it's possible to elicit strategies from any angle, although we're going to do it from straight on.

Isn't that great? So we can actually see it easily. This is the end of Tape 11, Side A.