# Metaprograms, Elicitations Of Metaprograms

Next one is the reason filter. And the reason filter will give us information about the reason why a person will do something. It's the reason why somebody will do something. The question is why are you choosing to do what you're doing? And then you listen for the answer.

We're on page 3-4, the reason filter. Why are you choosing to do what you're doing and the person will give you the answer? The answer could indicate possibility or necessity or both. Someone who is working from necessity will essentially give you a story about why they're choosing to do what they're doing, which is that there's no choice. They didn't choose it.

It was chosen for them. I remember one notable mid-level manager who was working at this engineering firm who were consulting and were doing we were doing business consulting. And I said, why are you, this guy was like the most necessity person I've ever heard. And by the way, most of the people, there have been more people who have been possibility that I've worked with than necessity, but I think it depends on the culture. This guy was a local Honolulu-born fella, and I said to him, why are you choosing to do what you're doing and he said I'm not really.

Well I said what do you mean? He said well I went to school to be an engineer and when I got out of school I got a job offer from this engineering firm and so I. Well, I said, well, didn't you choose to go to school for engineering? He said, no, my parents chose engineering for me, and I never really chose to be doing engineering. So this guy had an experience of his whole life not choosing to do what he was doing.

So the reason filter will also give you, in addition to the reason why someone will do something, the reason filter will also give you whether or not the person feels like they're in control of their life, which is, in many cases, going to give you some cause and effect information. Any questions about the reason filter? Great. Next is frame of reference. The question you want to ask the client is, how do you know when you're doing a good job?

My favorite frame of reference story is about a hairdresser. Do you ever go to a hairdresser and you get all done and this hairdresser will cut your hair and you get all done and you look in the mirror and go, what's that? And you say, that's not what I asked for. And the hairdresser says, well, I just thought that would look good on you. Have you ever had that?

I have. That's a hairdresser with a what kind of frame of reference? Internal. Now contrast that with, I went to this hairdresser in Honolulu and she, I think, currently gets about $75 for, up to $75 to $125 for a haircut. And I said to her, how do you, how do you, how do you know when you're doing a good job?

And she said, I don't. I said, well, what do you mean? She said, well, it depends on how the client reacts. So I said, well, I said, if you did a technically perfect haircut, I mean, if you knew that you were cutting hair technically perfectly and the client reacted poorly, would that be a good haircut? And she said, no.

So she didn't know that she did a good haircut until the client reacted to the haircut. That's a totally external frame of reference. She had, now, my guess is she probably had to have some sort of internal check to know how to technically cut hair correctly. But in not knowing whether the haircut was correct based on the client's response, until she got the client's response, she gave us an answer which was totally external. Someone could also be balanced or internal with an external check or external with an internal check.

Those are also possibilities. Those are also possibilities. And simply, you're going to listen to what the client says and notice whether or not they're totally externally oriented or internally oriented. Next is the convincer. See, hear, read, and do, by the way, are the rep systems, and they relate to, and the rep systems relate, the see, hear, read, and do relate directly to visual auditory, auditory digital, or actually in this case it's visual digital, but we wouldn't want to use a rep system like VD, so we just call it auditory digital.

And do, which is kinesthetic. So how do you know when someone else is good at what they do is the question. And for me, this is less important, but it puts them in the state. This is less important than the convincer demonstration, which is the next part of the question. So these two, four and five, should be asked almost immediately on the heels of each other.

How do you know someone else is good at what they do? I have to see, hear, read, do. And how often does someone have to demonstrate competence to you before you're convinced? And you'll have a person who's automatic, has a number of times, or a period of times, or consistent. This is interesting.

Let me tell you about somebody who, I was consulting this guy, he was on his third corporation, and his third corporation was about to go bankrupt. And he'd built up his companies three times, and each time he built the company up very big, and then hired people that didn't do the job, and so ended up going bankrupt. And so, what do you think his convincer was? Actually, it was automatic, but there was one other thing that was important, which was it was auditory. So, number four, he could hear about someone.

He could hear about someone from someone else and automatically be convinced they could do the job. And then he would, because his convincer was automatic, he never checked up on them. So he ended up bankrupting three rather large corporations as a result of not, as a result of automatically having that convincer. Here's another one. We were working with our same engineering firm, which is where we got, by the way, a wealth of experience.

And I appreciate working with those guys. And we were working with the mid-level managers. And one of the complaints about this mid-level manager that I was working with was he didn't check the work enough. He didn't check the work enough. So in eliciting his convincer rep, it was C, because he would see the work of his co-workers or the people under him, and he would look at it.

But his convincer was a number of times. So after he'd checked the work three or four times, he figured he didn't have to. Now, just for your information, a mid-level manager in an engineering firm needs to check their work every time. Because if he doesn't, the bridge may fall down. Right?

So, the mid-level, the mid-level manager in an engineering firm needs to have a consistent convincer. That was one of the first things we identified. And by the way, we simply shifted his convincer to consistent. And the complaints about him stopped immediately. And after that, none of the work got out.

And we treated the convincer like a strategy, which it is. So essentially, the process of changing this convincer for him was, and I'll go back through this when we go back to how to change metaprograms, but essentially it was just rehearsal. So I had him rehearse, seeing the work, auditory digital, saying to himself, I really need to check this, and then feeling good when he knew that he checked it. Switched his condenser to consistent and no problem. Okay, management direction filter.

This is an interesting one. It tells about how a person will do working with someone else. Do you know what you need to do to be a success on a certain job? Do you know what someone else needs to do? Do you find it easy or not so easy to tell them?

So there are people who know what they need to do on a certain job to be a success, and that's self. Someone who only knows what they need to do on a certain job is self only. If they know what someone else needs to do, that's self and others, as long as they know what their self is. There are some people, however, who don't know that. And these are probably really good bureaucrats.

I don't know if you've met people like this. But they have no idea what they need to do to be a success on the job, but they certainly know what you need to do. And they find it very easy to tell you. They find it very easy to tell you. No, I don't know what to do, but I know what you should do, and let me tell you what you should be doing.

That's others only. And then the final one is there are some folks who know what they need to do but have no idea what others should do. They just don't have any idea, which is different from self only. Self only is, yeah, I know what to do. I know what I need to do.

I do not know what someone else needs to do. But self but not others is essentially, do you know what you need to do? Yes. Do you know what someone else needs to do? Who am I to tell them?

So there's a whole other issue about, am I capable of telling this person? And of course, this tells us whether or not a person is going to make a good manager, doesn't it? So we found this very useful in in predicting whether or not a person would end up being a really good manager or not. Okay, action filter. Number seven, we're on page three-six.

Metaprogram number seven. When you come into a situation, do you usually act quickly after sizing it up, or do you do a complete study of all the consequences and then act? Someone who's active, also in business called proactive. Someone who's active or proactive, come into a situation, size it up, and make due action. And by the way, the way to ask this question is like this.

When you come into a situation, do you usually act quickly after sizing it up, or do you do a complete study of all the consequences and then act? So you need to emphasize the word all. Someone who does a complete study of all the consequences and then act, or someone who never acts, is reflective. So it's proactive or active or reflective. And someone who does both is both, and then there's the person who actually never acts is going to be inactive.

Reflective actually goes all the way up to, but not including, never acting. So reflective has a big range of not doing. Okay? Next is the affiliation filter. Tell me about a work situation in which you were the happiest at one time event.

And the client's gonna tell you about a time when they were either independent or in charge of a team, or excuse me, in a team or in charge of a team. And that'll tell you, again, whether or not they're independent enough or whether or not they work well with the team. And someone who's an independent player may not end up being a good manager. So do you think that most business consultants are, what do you think most business consultants are? Independent.

Right. Even though they're working with a group of people or a team, they're mostly independent. Yep. Okay, work preference filter. Tell me about a work situation in which you were the happiest, a one-time event, and you get things, systems, and people.

Some people like to work with things. Some people like to work with systems. Some people like to work with people. Things is obvious. That's, you know, a client says, well, I was working on a computer.

Now, the thing about working on a computer, though, is it could be things or systems, especially if the person was figuring out something about how to systematize something or something like that. The person who works with people will tell you more about, quite frankly, about people when they tell you about the one-time event in which they were happiest. Number ten, what's your favorite restaurant? Tell me about it. I actually had one client who says, I don't have a favorite restaurant.

Client says, I don't have a favorite restaurant. And I thought about it. I thought about it. I said, wow, that's really bizarre. I said, why not?

Why not? And she said, well, they're all too boring. What do you think that was? Activity. Not enough going on.

So this person clearly had a high primary interest in activity and most restaurants moved too slow for her. Including McDonald's, a serving a second. Chunk size filter, that's highly related to Myers-Briggs. Question is, if we were going to do a project together, would you want to know the big picture first or the details first? And they'll give you one of them, and then would you really need to know, and then ask the other.

Would you really need to know the big picture or the details? You're going to get some information. Big picture is global. Details is specific. And then you'll get a range specific to global or global to specific.

Relationship filter. Would you turn to page 310? The way to ask this question is to take three quarters and put them so they're facing the way it shows on page 310. So two quarters with their heads facing to the left and one quarter with their head facing straight up. Or if you don't live in the United States, three coins of the same denomination which have heads on them, which most countries do, and turn them so that two of them face the same way and one of them faces a different way.

Alternatively, if you look at your short MPVI form, which has three boxes on the backside, you can hold that up and show it to the client and say, what's the relationship? And then you'll say, what's the relationship between these three coins? If you cast this closely enough, if you pay attention to this closely enough, what you'll be able to do is predict job longevity. This, this is, this seems almost magical to the managers to whom I've taught this and they just love it. So, what's the prediction?

Remember from your reading, sameness is, prediction is 25 years or more, same job. Sameness with exception is approximately seven years. Sameness and difference equally is five years. Differences with exception is three to five years, and differences is 18 months. So I'm in the engineering firm again.

I said to the guy, what's the relationship between these three coins? And he says, there are many relationships. He said, in fact, the relationships are almost infinite. And then he says, and they're all different. This guy was one of the most creative engineers in the firm.

And I said, do you change jobs a lot? And he went, how'd you know? I said, how often have you changed jobs? He said, well, he said, in the last 12 years, I've had 18 different jobs. I've moved back and forth between Hawaii and the mainland three times.

I said, do you enjoy that? He goes, yep. Helps keep my creativity alive. That's the furthest out I have met. Of course, on the other side of the coin, there's folks who are total sameness, and they're going to be, what's the relationship between these three boxes?

They're all the same. Or what's the relationship between these three coins? They're all quarters. Alternatively, if you had a large room, you could take three chairs, turn two of them one way, one of them the other way, and use chairs. That's also an all.

But I was once talking to a fellow in Washington, D.C., and he said to me, you know, I've read your book on metaprograms, and he said, I'm not really good at eliciting the relationship filter. He said, I'm not really good at predicting job longevity with it. I don't think it works. And I said, well, tell me what you're doing. He said, well, I use three coins, just like you said.

I said, what do you use? He said, yeah, I use a nickel, dime, and a quarter. And I went, oh, okay, well, that's the deal. So would you please use three quarters? If you use a nickel, dime, and a quarter, you'll point out the obvious that they are all different.

We don't want someone who can see that different coins are different. We want someone who can't see that the same coins are different. So we do that. Yes? If your first instinct is to say they add up to 75 cents, is that your first instinct?

Excellent. And what other relationships are there between the three quarters? Well, one's going up and two are going side. They're all the same distance apart. They're all on the same level.

So what do you get? And they have different years and they have different colors. Actually, what I'm going to do is we'll come back to this. That's a standard answer. We'll come back to this, and what I'd like to do is go through each one and see if we can predict answers.

Let's, like we say in Hawaii, helion here. So I'm going to answer your question in just a minute. We'll come right back to you. I'm going to ask you that same question when we get, I want to go through each of these so you can have the opportunity to have some input. Okay, next is emotional stress response.

Tell me about a situation that gave you trouble, a one-time event. And what you want to do is watch the person. Notice if they say, well, this and this happened. Notice if they associate into the problem. If you see the person associate, then they're feeling.

If you notice the person doesn't associate, then they're thinking. The interesting thing, I don't know if it says this in the book, but the feeling manager is going to come off as being more caring. The feeling manager will also have more situations where he or she had problems with a trouble event, but they will come off to their employees as being more caring. A totally thinking manager will in many cases seem to be unfeeling to his or her employees. Okay, time storage, in time and through time, we got that.

Modal operator sequence, that's pretty safe. What's the last thing you said to yourself before you got out of bed this morning? Well, I'm going to go around and ask that. And then finally, attention direction. And there's no question for attention direction you just observe.

It's simply an observation. The person who sorts by self will be more interested, will be more internal than the person who sorts by others who will be more external. If you're doing hiring and you have frontline people, what you want is the people that says you're looking for the compulsive others person. Northwest Airlines was taught this particular metaprogram to solve a problem they had about customer complaints. Northwest Airlines had a very, very high level of customer complaints.

And so the way that they were taught using this metaprogram to solve the problem was essentially what they would do is they would get a bunch of employees in the room, in a hiring room, which had a piece of one-way glass in it, and the employees were being observed. And what they asked the employees to do was to get up and give a short three-minute presentation about themselves. And, of course, what the employees thought was they were being evaluated on how they got up and spoke in front of the group and that's not what they were evaluating. What they were evaluating was how did the people in the audience pay attention to the person speaking. And if the person in the audience shook their head when the person spoke and kept eye contact with them and really paid attention to them, that was a compulsive sort by other's person and they hired that person.

It took their complaint ratio and slammed it to zero when they put those kind of people on the front line. So if in doing that you're looking for somebody who, if you're going to do that, use it in a job process, that'll totally take and slam the complaints to zero. Okay, so let's play. I want to talk about the three new metaprograms in just a bit, but I want to play first. And let's see where everybody is.

And let's go around and see if we can identify these easily, because they're pretty easy. I don't think we have to do, I don't think we have to do toward and away from, right? I've already talked about that. But let's just run through some folks, and we'll just see if we can identify easily. So, Rich, what do you want?

A job? A job? Yeah. Freedom? Toward or away from?

Toward. Creativity? Toward. Fun? Toward.

And financial freedom? Financial freedom? Right. Toward? Probably.

A little hesitation there. Could be a possible away, but we don't know yet. What else? What else, what else, what else, what else? Comradery.

Yeah. Okay. Toward, probably. Nice environment. Are you pretty much a toward person?

Yeah. How do we know that? Who's more away from? Let's see if we can get someone who's away from. Who identifies themselves as more away from?

Anybody? People are going, not me. I'm not raising my hand. It would help me out greatly. We won't say who it is.

Away from. You're away from? Okay. Well, let's see. If you don't give us your away froms, it'll ruin the training.

Oops. Okay, so what do you want in a job? Excitement. Yeah, what else? The toward or away from?

Toward. It's mostly away from boredom, though. Away from boredom, okay. She's got the toward words down. Okay, away from boredom.

So you don't want boredom in a job? No. Oh, okay. What else? Some people.

Some people. What is that? Is there a comparative there? Some. Right, so some.

What does that mean? Not too many. Not the wrong ones. Okay, what else? Creativity.

Creativity. What else? People who aren't dumb. People who aren't dumb. Yeah, good.

What else? Flexibility. Flexibility. Great. Thank you.

Okay. So we got to recognize a few away froms. Let's do the next one. Second one. Okay.

So what's the next metaprogram? Next metaprogram is a reason metaprogram. The question is why are you choosing to do what you're doing? Necessity. Well, but you have to give me your answer, though.

Oh, necessity. Okay. I have to do this now because it's financing what I intend to do. Okay. Great.

What is that? Necessity. I mean, if the guy says necessity, why are you choosing to do what you're doing? I was going to say possibility because I'm moving toward what I want, and these are the building blocks. Possibility or necessity?

It's really simple. You just look and see whether the person has choice. Opportunities. What is that? Possibility or necessity?

Possibility. Yeah, I want to do what I want to do. Possibility or necessity? Possibility. Yeah, I want to do what I want to do.

You can't copy Ian. You can't, really. Why are you choosing to do what you're doing? Because of all the opportunities. Okay, these guys are all possibility people here.

Money and freedom. Oh, geez. Opportunity. Well, is there anybody else necessity? It's hard to find, you know, good necessity folks.

Because I can't stay where I am, I have to keep moving. Whoa. Possibility or necessity? Necessity. You're both?

Oh, I'll be back for you, Murray. I was just going to say, I need to do something that I can make good money at. Possibility or necessity? Just listen for the modal operator. Murray, why are you choosing to do what you're doing?

Well, like this training, I'm doing this because of all the possibilities of what it will mean for me, and I don't want to be an itinerant leaf raker in my future. Whoa, man. Would we say that Murray, in this case, moves toward or away from? Okay. Away from, too.

He gave us an away from. Okay. Next one's frame of reference. How do you know when you've done a good job? Joe?

When I do a seminar, at the end of the seminar, I know that I've done a good job, but then when I see some of the evaluations that didn't agree with my analysis, I'm going, hmm, what did I miss? So I think I'm internal with an external check. You could be. You could be. But if the external check causes you to invalidate the internal that you had during the seminar, you may be external with an internal check.

Could be. Could be. That's what I would say. And we have some agreement over here. Okay.

That's good. That's a good example, though. Who else? Rich, how do you know when you've done a good job? Looks good and feels good.

Looks good and feels good. To yourself? To me, yeah. I've got a picture ahead of time of what I want it to look like, and when it looks like that, I've done a good job. So what would you say?

Internal. Joel, how do you know when you've done a good job? Feels right. Internal or external? Internal.

Now, if you want to get a little more information than that, you can also say, so if you looked outside yourself, if it felt right, and you looked outside yourself and it wasn't, would it be right? Yeah. So that's totally internal, isn't it? Yeah. We've got a totally internal.

That's good. Thank you. Brian, how do you know when you've done a good job? Well, mostly I just know, and occasionally somebody will throw me a cookie, something to pat on the back. Now, here's a question you want to ask yourself.

If that's the case, you go, how do you know? So we're going to ask Brian, because occasionally someone will throw him a cookie. The question is, is that important to him? That's what we need to know. So is it important to you that someone tells you from time to time?

Yeah, from time to time. So that's an internal with a little itty-bitty external check, right? Okay, Matthew. I internally recognize it, but then I look for somebody who actually knows what they're doing. Oh, that's useful.

And if both states are congruent, then yeah, fine. So what is that? Yeah, it's both. It's balance, isn't it? Internal, both.

Balance, Totally, exactly, equal. Yes, George? When they sign the order form. What is that? External.

External. So, George, if they don't, what? They don't leave the office. All right. Said like a true salesman.

We're going to check his values level a little bit later on in this tape set. We're going to come back to you and see if he's values level five. Are you, by the way? Is he? Okay, Ian says he is.

Okay, Ian. Yeah, he sells cars. He's okay. Talk to me, Ian. How do you know you've done a good job?

I look at the profit loss and I get a feeling for it. Profit loss at the end of each month and I have a feeling. Do you have a feeling before? Now, what is that, by the way? External, but the question is, does he have a feeling independent of the profit and loss?

No, I have the feeling most of the time. I guess I would do that check daily or even several times a day. So this is good. This is good. So what would you say this is?

I would say it's balanced. I would say it's balanced because he needs to, he has a feeling several times a day. And how often do you check the P&L? Well, at least once a month, but I do weekly checks on that. You do weekly checks on sales and expenses or something like that?

Yeah. So I would say that's reasonably balanced in terms of, but then you need to know what the external check is, don't we? Because for Ian, the external check is he's checking the profit and loss statement, not necessarily people externally, which is interesting. This is the end of Tape 20, Side B.