# Logical Levels, Hierarchy Of Ideas, Miltonmodel, Hierarchy Of Ideas Negatiation Model

All right, welcome back. Now it's time to talk about chunking. So let's look at page 213. We've implied chunking. We've talked a little bit about it.

We said definitely go from abstract to specific or from specific to abstract. But let's talk for a moment about the hierarchy of ideas. And we're on page 213. What the hierarchy of ideas essentially says is that as you think about something, you can think either abstractly or specifically. And if we, for example, were to start in cars, which is in the center of your model here on the right side on page 213, if we were to start thinking about cars and we were to go one level more abstract, which is in the opposite direction of the arrow, for example, we were to go to transportation, the way we would get there is we'd ask ourselves, what are cars an example of?

And we might get the word transportation, or we might say, for cars, for what purpose? And we would get to the same place probably for transportation. If we asked ourselves transportation for what purpose or what is this an example of, we would get movement. And of course, this is a big leap. If we said movement, what is this an example of? we would get movement.

And, of course, this is a big leap. If we went from, if we said movement, what is this an example of, it would be an example of existence. That's chunking up. And you notice on the left-hand side where it says chunking up, in agreement it says, what is this an example of for what purpose and what is your intention? All of these will move you in a direction toward more abstraction.

Okay. Now, if we go back to our example of cars, we could chunk down from cars, but at some point we've got to get into a place where we make a choice. And the choice we have to make is we have to choose either classes and categories or parts. Either classes and categories or parts. If we choose classes and categories, cars, we're going to like what kind of car.

So we'd say a Pontiac. And if you remember the old Pontiac Fiero. Anyway, we can chunk down on Fiero. We can say what kind of Fiero. And if you knew about it, you could say, well, it's a GT or not.

Now, back to cars. We could also choose parts of cars. And we could say, you know, like there could be wheels or doors. And if we chunk down on wheels, we could say hubcaps, and even smaller than hubcaps, we'd get down to lug nuts. So we can chunk, we can talk all the way from existence to lug nuts, and we're still talking about the same logical type.

Logical type means, and that's not on your chart, logical type means staying from specific to abstract, but staying within the same context. The context is cars. The most abstract of cars is existence. The most specific of cars in our example is lug nuts. And movement, transportation, cars, wheels, hubcaps, lug nuts, all are the same logical type.

Okay? Now, this is interesting because we're asking you in quantum linguistics to go from specific to abstract. And we have a model, don't we? We have a model in NLP, which is a model of the ultimate abstraction, which is the Milton model. But first, let's just look at how you and I would, in the process of chunking or in the process of thinking, how we would go from abstract to specific.

And you can look at slide number 47, if you'd like. And those questions on slide 47 are on the left-hand side of page 213. So you don't really need to write them down. They're the same questions. The questions on the left for chunking up are, what is this an example of?

For what purpose? Or what is your intention? And in mediation, if you're chunking up, you just simply chunk up until you get the same word, until you get agreement, until you get a normalization. And then, of course, you chunk back down. We'll talk about that in a bit.

If you want to chunk down, you ask yourself what or whom specifically. You can also say what are examples of this. Or actually, most any metamodel question will also assist you in chunking down. Okay, so we've got the range of language from abstract to specific. And quantum linguistics uses this and takes advantage of this.

So you, as a NLP master practitioner, will be most effective at utilizing language if you're able to traverse the full range from abstract to specific. So here's some homework. Should you choose to accept this? And this is another one of those things like when I said run it through the four quadrants and you were to do that up until today, all your thoughts. Whoa.

Here's another process. Why don't you take every thought you have for the next couple of days and ask yourself, what is this an example of? For at least five or six times until you get to existence. Or maybe ten times. And then you could also do the same thing with each thought, chunking down, you could say, what are examples of this?

So the purpose of this is to open up your thinking. The purpose of this is to open up your thinking. So that you, as a master practitioner of NLP, are able to laughingly leap logical levels with alacrity. Yeah. That's the plan.

So, based on that plan, let's do an exercise. And this is going to loosen up our sort of, this is going to allow us to get to begin to think abstractly. And the purpose of this is simply to, for those of you who've done work with Milton model, for those of you who know it real well, if you're listening to the tapes, you can probably skip this exercise. Otherwise, it's a good exercise to do. So here's what I'd like you to do.

Let's look at page 216. And the Milton model, for those of you who are familiar with it, comes essentially from transformational grammar. And the categories in the Milton model are simply the categories of grammar that produce hypnotic or produce ambiguity, produce hypnotic language patterns or produce ambiguity. And essentially what happened was that the founders of NLP did a sort of, I would guess, a linguistic analysis, which is for want of a better term. It's kind of a fun thing to do, by the way, and if you have not listened to our accelerated NLP practitioner tapes, we do a linguistic analysis on a piece of music in those tapes in the basic training collection set.

That's kind of fun. I think it's worthwhile doing. The founders of NLP did it with the work of Milton Erickson and found that he used a number of language patterns that caused trance to occur. And one of the great contributions of neurolinguistic programming to the science of hypnosis is that ambiguity in any representational system can cause trance. So the Milton model is based on modeling Milton Erickson, and it essentially is some of his language patterns just simply categorized.

So let's look at what they are. And for many of you, this will be a review, but I think it's worth doing. I personally think you can't know language patterns well enough. So the first is mind reading. And mind reading is claiming to know the thoughts or feelings of someone else without specifying the process by which you came to know the information.

An example of that is, I know that you're wondering. Next is lost performatives. Lost performatives are value judgments, where the performer of the value judgment is left out. And it's a good thing to wonder. That's an example of that.

Our next category is cause and effect. Cause and effect is where it's implied that one thing causes another. Implied causatives is also another way of talking about cause and effect. And some examples are the verb to make, if then, or as you, then you. Those are all examples.

Also, we have those same examples in our presuppositions. Next example is complex equivalence, as in two meanings being equivalent. An example is that means. Category number five is just the rest of it. It's just general presuppositions.

They actually had a grab bag term and threw them all in, all the rest of them in there. Presuppositions are the linguistic equivalent of assumptions. In this case, we're saying you're learning many things as an example. Number six, universal quantifiers is a set of words which they have no referential index and they're universal generalizations. So they're big picture, word all, every, never are all universal quantifiers.

Modal operators. We talked about modal operators just a few minutes ago on tape. We all went through chaining modal operators. They're an example. They imply possibility or necessity.

They form the rules in our life. Nominalizations are process words which have been frozen in time, making them into nouns. An example is insights and understandings. Page 217. Unspecified verbs.

And you can. The verb, in this case, is unspecified because there's no object of the verb. Can do what? So it's totally unspecified. Furthermore, there's no adverb also modifying it, so it's really an unspecified verb.

Tag question is a question which is added after a statement designed to displace resistance. Can you not? So you can, it says, and you can. Can you not? Or you can, can't you?

Those are examples of tag questions. Lack of referential Index does not pick out a specific portion of the listener's experience. So one can, you know. In this case, the lack of referential index refers to one rather than saying you can or he can or she can or giving a specific name. Comparative deletion is where a comparison is made and it's not specified as to what or whom the comparison was made to.

For example, it's more or less the right thing. More or less usually are comparative deletions. You can also pace the client's current experience. So I could say, you're sitting here, you're listening to me, you're looking at me, et cetera, and we're pacing your verifiable external experience. Double binds are kind of fun.

They're illusion of choice offered by an orator. We could do a whole study on double binds if we wanted to. And there are many books on double binds. I think the best book on double binds is Creative Choice and Hypnosis by Erickson and Rossi. Erickson said, I think in that book or perhaps somewhere else, he said, I think my clients ought to have the choice to do exactly what I'm asking them to do in any way that they feel free to do it that way.

So double bind allows the client the illusion of choice. You say, would you like to go into a trance slowly or quickly? The choice is slowly or quickly. The illusion, of course, is the trance. Would you like to go into trance now or would you like to talk first?

And then my favorite single bind is, by the way, don't go into a trance yet because I need to talk to your conscious mind. Okay, 15, conversational postulate. A conversational postulate is a question to which the response is either going to be yes or no. And the question that you have to ask yourself or that one asks oneself is, if I want you to do something, what else has to be present so that you'll do it, and you'll do it outside of your awareness? This allows you to choose to respond or not, and it tends to avoid authoritarianism.

Actually, Virginia Satir was very fond of doing conversational postulates. So she, just at the exact perfect moment, she'd lean over and touch her client and she'd go, do you feel this? And the client would nod his or her head yes, and then she'd say, is right for you. Very powerful form of conversational postulate. Of course, one of the favorite ones is can you close the door?

If you have a teenager in your house, the teenager will say yes, walk out through the door and leave it open. The question is, if I want you to do something, what else needs to be present so that you'll do it and outside of your awareness? Conversational postulate allows the client to respond and avoids being authoritarian. Extended quotes are kind of fun. They actually, and the best way to do extended quotes for hypnosis, for hypnotic language patterns, is to make it impossible to tell where one quote leaves off and the next one begins.

So, for example, last week I met with Richard who told me about his training in Denver when he talked to someone who talked to him about, actually, Andre Weizenhofer, who quoted George Estabrook. And one of the things that's really important about that is that your client in hypnosis will not actualize what you don't believe to be true. Now, who said that, by the way? I'll just sort of step outside the quotes room. Who said that?

We don't know, and so these quotes are so extended at that point, it definitely causes a trance to occur. Selectional restriction violation is also kind of fun. I don't know if you've looked at your pen while you're listening to these tapes or not, but think of all the things that your pen wrote down while you weren't actually paying quite as much attention as your pen did. So think of all the things your pen knows, and if it could tell you all the things it wrote down, what would it say? So a selectional restriction violation is something that's not well-formed.

For example, a chair can have feelings. In that sense, it's not well-formed because we all know that chairs don't have feelings. Yet. Number 18, there are a number of different kinds of ambiguities. There's phonological ambiguities.

You can hear that here. Syntactic ambiguities, or the function, which is the syntactic function of a word cannot be immediately determined from the context, such as they are visiting relatives. The question is, are the relatives visiting, or have the people left to visit their relatives? We don't know. Scope ambiguity is when you have two things and it's not exactly clear how far the scope goes or how much of the scope applies to a certain portion of the sentence, such as speaking to you as a child, am I speaking to you as a child or are they?

The old men and women, we don't know if the women are old or not. The disturbing noises and thoughts, we don't know if the thoughts are disturbing. The weight of your hands and feet. All of those are essentially scope ambiguity. Page 19.

There are also punctuation ambiguities. There are several different kinds. I want you to notice your hand-me-the-glass. Run-on sentences. I notice you're wearing a watch.

Carefully, how quickly you can change. You can also pause it at the wrong place and then go on and continue to talk and make another sentence and another sentence. That's pausing at the wrong places is another form of... That's right. And there's a newscaster in the United States who's made a career out of doing that, because he always ends every newscast with, good day, if you remember who that was.

And of course, if you've ever watched Gracie Allen, you know about Incomplete, because she never ever finishes a certain, she never goes, I mean, she starts a certain thought and then, you don't have to, and you really don't have to finish your thoughts because there's lots, but you don't need to say everything because if your brain is actually, you know, working, well, people just talk on and on like that and it doesn't matter because everyone knows what you're, I mean, you know what I'm, don't you understand what I'm, you get it, right? Incomplete sentences. And then finally, utilization. Erickson was big on utilization. Oh, my favorite, did I ever tell you my favorite story of utilization?

I'm doing a trance induction in my house and there's a grandfather clock there. And I don't know if you know about grandfather clocks, but they have this little clicker that clicks over before they bong. And so I'm sitting there, and the client's really deep. He's really deep. And we're just starting the therapy.

And I've done some really good hypnosis. First time he ever got really deep. And he's like down the tubes. He's like way down. And all of a sudden, I hear the clicker that's ready to make the thing bong.

It clicks over. And I look up at the clock, and it's 7 o'clock. And I went, oh, no. Like, we're going to have seven bongs here. I mean, it could be worse.

It could be 12 bongs. But this is all stuff that's going through my mind. But it's going to be seven bongs. And I went, we're in big trouble. What are we going to do?

And then I look back at him. I look at the clock. I look back bong. And I said, one. Bong.

Two. Actually, he said it was one of the most profound hypnotic experiences he'd ever had. And he wondered if he was hallucinating the bong, which he wouldn't do in my house. He might do that in India, but not in my house. Oh, that is a Buddha joke.

Here's another one. Here's another one. This example's for sales, but Erickson used it in hypnosis. Client said, I don't feel like I'm hypnotized. Erickson said, that's right.

You don't feel like you're hypnotized yet because you're evaluating hypnosis with your conscious mind and it's your unconscious mind that you go into a trance with right now. Great utilization. So one of my favorite ways of utilizing is you just feedback what the client says, that's right, comma, yet. Whatever the client says, you say, that's right, not yet, because, and then say whatever it is the reason. If a client says, I'm not sold, you say, that's right, you're not sold yet, because you haven't asked the one question that will have you totally and completely sold.

That's a useful pattern, by the way, because if the client's unconscious mind accepts that, you don't have to answer the question. They just have to ask it. Useful. Okay, Milton model. Okay, now, so if you look on page 220, there are some examples of Milton model.

The 1993 Irvine Accelerated Practitioner class actually typed out a bunch of hypnotic language patterns and then gave them to us on disk. So there's just a whole bunch of examples of all different kinds of examples of mind reads, lost performatives. Pages 220 through, I mean, I think there's a plethora of it. So if you just want to immerse yourself in language patterns, read that. But I'm going to suggest we also do an exercise.

So here's the exercise if you're ready. What I'd like you to do is to get together with five people. So get together in a group of five. And what I'd like you to do is each of you come up with a hypnotic language pattern, and when you get good ones, write them down. So person one will come up with a mind read, and person two will come up with a mind read, and three, four, five, and just go around.

And of course, you're not going to do this consciously. Just like in the first exercise, we're asking you to not do this consciously, to do it unconsciously, and just speak it out. And then when you get good ones, because good ones will come up that way, write them down. Okay? And go through this exercise.

This exercise should actually take about an hour, at three minutes apiece, because there's 20 patterns. So it'll probably take about an hour, an hour and a half. And so whenever you're ready, go ahead and do the exercise. Stop the tape now and do the exercise. All right, welcome back.

How did that go? Did you guys get pretty spaced out? Totally, huh? Are you kind of drooling? It went by very fast, did it?

Excellent. Excellent, excellent, excellent. Alright, so we've talked about the Milton model. We've talked about chunking. You know about chunking up and down.

Let me give you one more exercise, which I would like you to do before we actually do our negotiation. It's on wall chart 47. So let's look at wall chart, yeah, number 47. Now, here's the plan. The client will sit down directly opposite from the practitioner.

The client will sit down directly opposite from the practitioner. And the client and the practitioner will look at each other and the observer will stand behind the practitioner. For those of you who took our accelerated practitioner training, we've already done this exercise. We're just going to do this again. I think I'll draw it on wall chart number nine.

That's right. Thank you. So what we have here is we have the client A, the practitioner B, and the observer C. A and B, this is an exception to how we normally sit, but A will sit directly across from B. C will actually be standing up.

C will actually be standing up. And we'd like A to tell a story. A, we'd like you to tell a story. And C, you're going to control the chunking level of A. So if you want A to chunk up, then you hold your thumb up.

If you want A to chunk down, then you hold your thumb down. And if you want A to chunk laterally, then you hold your thumb to the left. How do you chunk laterally? Well, what you do is, if you look at wall chart number 47 or the hierarchy of ideas, page 213, what you'll do is you'll chunk up one level. You'll ask yourself, what is this an example of?

Chunk up one level, and then what are other examples of this? And chunk back down one level so you're at the same level. I'm going to demonstrate this in just a moment. So C controls the chunking level of A. C controls the chunking level of A.

And B has to recognize what the chunking level is. So B, you're going to hold your thumb up when you recognize a chunk up. You're going to hold your thumb down when you recognize a chunk down. You're going to hold your thumb horizontally when you recognize a horizontal chunk. Okay?

That's the exercise. I'd like to demonstrate it. So who wants to, I'll be A, I'll be the client. And who wants to do that with me? Anybody?

Okay. Joe, why don't you, while you use your thumb to tell me which direction to chunk in, say on the microphone whether you're going to have me chunk up, down, or laterally, and then the folks listening to the tapes can actually experience that. Okay, and hold your thumb up nice and high so everybody in class can see. Okay. Okay, so I just got back from a vacation, and I went to Mars.

Sideways. Mars. Mars was kind of cold, kind of red, and any planet will do, really, because, you know, there's lots of things to, Well, specifically, the red dirt was kind of nice. The rocks were great, the stones, the pebbles. And there was water on the planet Earth.

And water is something you can drink. And that makes you healthy, totally healthy. And if you improve your health, certainly it's something that will improve your brain. Actually, your brain will actually get more, it'll actually, the little things inside your brain will get more, you know, sort of squishy. And the neural network connections will grow more...

Okay, sideways. And your skin will be much better. Okay, thanks, Joe. You're really stretching me. I'm done with that.

He sideways chunked me before I even got anywhere. Anyway, okay, so that's the exercise. It's really a lot of fun. If you can get together with three folks, go ahead and do it. And if you're going to do that, just go ahead and stop the tape.

All right, welcome back. How did that exercise go? Good. Are you better at chunking now than you were? Yeah.

I knew it. I knew you would be. I knew you would be. Okay, excellent. So you guys are masters of chunking, are you?

Masterful, masterful at chunking. All right, we're going to do then one more exercise, and that exercise is right on page 214. And this is negotiation. This is actually a fun exercise. We taught this exercise to the military intelligence of the Pacific.

No, we really did, and they thought it was the best thing they ever heard. This is, in my opinion, the simplest process of negotiation that it's easy to remember. You always know where you are. And it's a very useful process. I've used this personally in doing negotiation with people.

In fact, my favorite one was, and it took us about five minutes, I was working with this manufacturing plant and the two owners of the manufacturing plant. They said, well, we're going to hire you as a business consultant, they said, but we don't have any hope at all. I said, why not? They said, well, we've been in business together for 25 years, and we can't even agree on the color of the wallpaper. Hello, do you hear that?

We can't even agree on the color of the wallpaper. What is that? Low chunk, isn't it? Well, of course we're not agreeing on the color of the wallpaper. They don't have any higher chunk to agree upon.

So they were totally off the wall. Sorry. They were totally off the wall because they had no bigger chunk program, no bigger chunk picture, no big picture to look at. So this negotiation model is easy to remember. It's very, very simple.

And it's easy to do. I'll go through it. I'll talk with you a little bit about it. And then what I'd like to do is I'll give you an example of how that might work. So what the first thing to do is to chunk up.

And I'm looking at slide number 48. We're on page 214. The first thing to do is to chunk up and make sure that both sides, there should be an apostrophe there, possessive, make sure that both sides' highest intention is represented by the same word, roughly. In other words, so you've got two sides. It's almost like parts integration.

You've got two sides. You're going to chunk up, at least get up to a nominalization. At least get up to a nominalization. You may want to go up two or three levels beyond that even. Once you're up to the level where both sides are represented by the same word, then you're going to separate intention from behavior by using a conditional close.

So the conditional close is so that if you get X, what's X? X is the same word you got in number one, so you're going to take the word you got in number one, and you're going to say to both sides, so if you got X, then however you get it is okay. Of course, they're going to agree, and then you chunk back down only as quickly as you can maintain agreement. Okay? You chunk back down only as quickly as you can maintain agreement.

So here's an example. This is probably a really good example from a union negotiation. The workers want more money. Workers say, we want more money. We're going to go on strike for more money.

And management says there's no more money currently available. So the negotiator says to the workers, more money for what purpose? And the workers say we'd like to have more money so that we can retire easily. So more money for what purpose? For retirement.

For what purpose? For financial security when we get old. Now, that makes it very easy for management to put together a deferred pension plan, doesn't it? The workers get what they want, management puts together a deferred pension plan, and both sides have, so the deferred pension plan, essentially what we say is, so you say to them, so if you get financial security when you get older, then however you get it's okay. Workers say yes.

Then you chunk back down into the details. You chunk back down into the details only as quickly as you can to maintain agreement. Only as quickly as you can to maintain agreement. So again, I'm talking to this, doing business consulting, talking to this manufacturing plant, and he says to me, this is when we were actually, this is the first time we were actually negotiating our fee when we were doing business consulting. And the guy says to me, he says, so we get into this situation, and I'm doing our proposal, and we're all talking about it, and we're getting very close.

He's almost ready to purchase, and he says to me, by the way, how many meetings a month are we going to have, and how much time are you going to spend, and what kind of reports are you going to write? And I said to myself, and by the way, what's he doing? Chunking down. Now, we didn't have an agreement he was going to hire us, so I thought that was much too detailed at that point. So I said to him, just for a moment, let's talk about the big picture.

Just for a moment, let's talk about why we'd want to have a relationship in the first place. Relationship's important to you, is it not? He goes, yes. So, we then went through, we then went through staying at a very high level chunk, and the truth is, by the way, I never told him how many times we were going to meet, even after we signed the agreement. I never told him how many times we were going to meet.

We only talked about big picture. And the big picture that was most important to him in this case was being profitable. So we finally got to the point, so I said, well, like, what would be the most important thing to you in a consulting relationship? And he said that the company was profitable. So I said, so if we can turn the company around and have it be profitable, this is step number two now, right?

So if we turn the company around and have it be profitable, then however we do that is okay. And he goes, yes, I agree. So I said, and this is something very interesting, if you're ever selling consulting services to a business, this is probably a really important concept if you're at all interested in how you pay for yourself when doing business consulting. So I said to him at this point, so let's see. Is your company profitable now?

He said no. So I said, okay, so if you hire us and you become profitable, then we are essentially free, aren't we? And he goes, why, yes. So I said, if that's the case, then however we produce, the profitability is okay with you, isn't it? And he said, yes.

So at that point, did he care about number of meetings and the number of reports? No, because we'd agreed on the most important thing to him was profitability, and we also had agreed on how to pay for it, which was, and do you all understand that concept? If you have a company with a bottom line, and they're not making any money, what that means is you have your income and you subtract from your income your expenses, and the bottom line is how much profit they make. So if you go to a company that's not making any profit and they pay you anything, let's say they pay you $10,000 a month, which would be a lot. Well, maybe not.

It depends on the size of the company. If they pay you that much money and they become profitable, are you free? Yes, because they have now got $1 on their bottom line, or they have $1 profit. So all the money they paid you only increased their profitability, which is ultimately the bottom line of how that would go. So from a business point of view, that was a very powerful negotiation.

If you're listening to the tapes and want to go back and rewind the tapes and have that explained again, you might want to listen to it again. All right, so what I'd like you to do is to go ahead and do this exercise. Get with two other people. So you're the negotiator, and the two other people choose opposite sides of a particular problem. If you'd like to have fun, you could choose nuclear proliferation or disarmament.

That's sort of a fun. You could also pick union or no union if you want to do a business negotiation. Union or no union in your corporation. Those are fun ones. Or pick something that the two of you could be legitimately on two sides of.

And then the negotiator goes ahead and negotiates that. That'll be groups of three. We'll spend 15 minutes each on this. So this is a 45-minute exercise. 45-minute exercise total. Groups of three.

So once again, two sides. Pick opposite sides. You're going to have to talk about that for a moment and agree on it. And then what I'd like you to do is negotiate it each for 15 minutes. So 15 minutes each.

And the negotiator, what I want you to do is then to chunk up, make sure both sides' highest intention is represented by the same word, separate intention from behavior using a conditional close, and then chunk back down only as quickly as you can maintain agreement. Notice what happens when you do this. It's a very, very powerful negotiation process. So if you're listening to the tapes and you're ready to do this exercise, stop the tapes now and do the exercise. Stop the tapes now.

This is the end of tape six, side B. Thank you.