# Submods, Drivers, Contrastive Analyses

We're going to move on to not just submodalities, but the advanced patterns of NLP. And to me, these are kind of fun. There are some patterns that we need to learn. There are some patterns which are very, actually quite, I would say, intense and may be useful under certain circumstances, and there may be some patterns which you may ultimately end up using. So let's talk a little bit about some of the issues in submodalities and what actually makes submodalities work.

For some of you, this will be a review. And for some of you, this may be the first time that you've actually heard this. And we're going to be talking and looking at Section 4, page 1. So there are some issues that really, really make a difference with regards to submodalities. And we're looking at slide number 101.

There are some issues which will make your submodality interventions work, and these are actually quite important submodality distinctions, and ones I think which will be useful for you in working with clients. I'd like to share with you some advanced techniques of submodalities, and then I'd like to move on, if we could, in this segment to talk about some, what I'd like to call drivers, which actually work at the neurological level. So we'll take the notion of drivers as being primary things that move or primary things that cause things to happen from a submodality point of view and expand that into the process or expand that into the concept of looking at our neurology. All right. So there are some things that really make submodalities work.

We're looking at page 4.1 and slide number 101. We'll start halfway down the page on 4.1. There are some things that really make our submodalities work, and one of them is drivers. What are drivers? Drivers are the submodality distinctions, the difference that actually makes the difference.

Finding the drivers are really, really important if you haven't ever done a contrastive analysis. Essentially, what happens in a contrastive analysis is that we're comparing two pictures. You remember that from your practitioner training, but indeed you're actually comparing picture one and picture two. So if you actually take and compare the relationship between one picture and another picture, the drivers are what makes a difference. The drivers are the difference that makes a difference.

So if you look at wall chart number 13, if I have two pictures, picture A and picture B, if I were doing contrastive analysis between A and B, if A was in color, and B was in color, and A was near, and B was near, And A was associated. And B was dissociated. And A was located in the center of the screen. And B was located to the upper right of the screen, and so forth and so on, then probably we could say that the drivers for this particular context or for this particular set of pictures would be the difference between A and B would be the difference between associated and dissociated and the difference of the location. And in fact, associated, dissociated, and location are often, are often drivers.

Now there's also some other distinctions we can make about drivers. One of them is that when, when one driver changes, they all change. Which means essentially if we change the location, it may actually change the entire meaning of the picture or all the other drivers along with it. And location is often a prime driver for someone. There are some other distinctions we can make about the drivers themselves with regards to contrastive analysis, and these are on page 4.1.

For example, associated and dissociated are digital consideration. Digital means that you're either associated or dissociated. You're probably not, there's probably not a continuum in between for most people. Whereas distance, distance is analog. It's an analog consideration.

Distance means you can have a varying amount of distance. You know, there's an analog and a digital watch, right? An analog watch has a hand that goes around, and the small discrete changes in the place of where the hand goes are analog considerations, whereas a digital watch has numbers that goes 1, 2, 3, so you don't actually see those numbers move from 1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, like that. They actually just go from 1 to 2 to 3. The numbers just go like that.

So digital means that it is actually either, and in the case of submodalities, digital means it's either on or off. So distance is an analog, but it's non-continuous. Distance is an analog, but non-continuous driver. Distance is an analog, but non-continuous. Meaning that I can move a picture closer and closer and closer and closer and closer, but at some point, I can't move it any closer.

Whereas size is analog, but it's continuous, which means I can take something and increase its size from very, very minuscule to infinity. Right? That makes a lot of sense, doesn't it? So what is location? Location is analog, right?

Yeah, well, if we take location as, together with size, we might say it's possible to blow it up to the size of the universe, right? Or, but if we take it as distance, it certainly is non-continuous location, right? And how about brightness? This discussion is about drivers and how they work. So, yeah, good thinking.

You're right on the right track, man. So, it's, it's when you take a picture and throw it out to the, to the horizon, right, all the way out, when you take that picture and move it all the way out to the horizon, as in the second kind of switch pattern. The first kind of switch pattern that we worked with in NLP, or the first kind of switch pattern that you worked with, probably in NLP, is on slide number 104. And what you'll remember is you had the present state full screen and the desired state in the lower left-hand corner, and you had the desired state explode big and bright and cover up the present state. And there was another kind of swish pattern, and in a moment we're going to talk about designer swish patterns, but there was another kind of swish pattern where you would actually take the present state and zoom it out to the size of a pinpoint on the horizon, and then you'd zoom it back in in a new location, and you'd make sure that the present state crossed the midline when you did that.

That's pretty well on the accelerated practitioner tape set, the basic training collection, and you can certainly listen to the description of that there. What's brightness? What is brightness? Analog and what? Continuous.

Brightness is analog and continuous, because you can brighten it up to infinitely bright, can you not? Or you can darken it down to infinitely dark. So brightness has a whole range, which is, you know, all or nothing. And what is color versus black and white? Color versus black and white is digital, but color is actually analog.

That is pastels versus very rich colors. So there's a combination of those. There's a combination of those. Let's go through and talk a little bit about universals, and then I want to come back and we'll have an experience of how some of these drivers work. We can play with that, and then I want to talk about designer switch patterns and how one might do a designer switch.

But let's talk about universals. One of the things that makes submodalities work is attaching the submodality to a universal experience. Like, for example, the stoplight or the go light. So, if you're listening to tapes and you've never heard this before, imagine you're driving along in your car and, by the way, this is how you elicit the state for go light. You're driving along in your car and you're far enough back from the intersection and the light turns red.

What do you do? Stop. Yeah, you're far enough back that you can't make it through. Right? You hit the brake.

Now, do you think those are a pretty powerful set of submodalities? Probably. Because it's a universal experience. I mean, unless a person doesn't drive, they might say, well, I live in New York City, I don't drive. Okay.

It's possible. So, but let's say, assume someone's a driver. Now, let's talk about the go light. So you're driving along in your car and the light turns, turns green. What do you do?

You go. Do you always go? Always. Always. So that's a real powerful set of submodalities, isn't it?

That's a real powerful set of submodalities. And we can actually take and put, and I've actually done this, a project, for example, a business person working on a project, we can actually take and put the project in the same submodalities as the go light and make it really something they want to move forward on. Does anybody have a project that they wanted, when they're, I mean, when you think of it, that you've, that you wanted to get started on, but you haven't? Do you? What's the project?

A healing center. Do you want to, but you haven't gotten going on it. Do you know why? Your excuse is money. Great.

But let's, let's just assume you were going on it. Would you have the money? Right. You want to play for a minute? Come on up.

Give her a hand. So you have a healing center, or you want to have a healing center. And let's say, what would happen if you actually got going on creating the money. Yeah? You'd actually start doing it.

Okay. So do you drive? Yes. So you're driving along in your car, and you're way back from the intersection, but you're the only car there, and the light turns red. What do you do?

Stop. You stop. Do you always stop? Yeah. Okay.

Let's say you're sitting at the intersection, the light turns green and you really want to get somewhere. What do you do? Go. Do you always go? Yes.

Okay. When you think of that, do you have a picture? Yes. Yeah? Good.

How far is it from you, roughly? That's where you paint. Right about here? Yeah. And is it black and white or color?

Black and white. And is it a movie or a still? Movie. And are you looking through your own eyes? Yes.

Is it bright or dim? Bright. Bright. Okay. Okay.

Can you clear the screen? Now, let's see. Healing center. When you think of getting going on creating a healing center and you, you know, you want to, you want to, you want to do that, when you think of creating the money for a healing center, do you have a picture? Yes.

Okay. Now, let me just ask you a question about that picture. Is it in color or black and white? Black and white. What would happen if we just took it and put it right there?

Is that about the right place? It's over there. What happens if we brought it in there and put it right there? It looks different. Does it?

Yeah. And what happens? What if we made it into a movie? About three feet away from you, right there. About three feet away from you.

And you're looking through your own eyes. It's nice and bright. And what if you just, you know, just left it there? You know the sound the Tupperware makes when it seals, right? Just like that, lock it right in.

Good. Okay. Nice day, isn't it? It's a break state, by the way. Kind of warm, yeah.

Okay. All right, so let's see. Tell me about this healing center. I've been wanting it for about eight years. Is it something you feel you can get going on?

I can if I could get over the hurdle of thinking I need the money first. Yeah. So can you create a picture in your mind, or can you create a picture of how you would create the money? Can you, in your mind, can you, in your mind, create, or just get in touch with how you'd create the money? No idea.

No idea. No. Now, but let's just say for a moment that you were, you know, a really creative person. You had lots of ideas about how to create the money. That you had, I mean, do you know anyone who can create?

Yeah. Yeah. So let's just assume that for a moment you had the same sort of ideas and the same sort of capabilities in your mind and were able to go out and create whatever it was you needed to create. Can you see yourself in a situation like that? Yes.

Being able to create the kind of money that you wanted to create. I mean, if you were a great communicator and you were able to explain your ideas to people and you were able to inspire people about that, that would be something that you'd be able to do, wouldn't it? Yeah. So let's just suppose for a minute that you were that kind of person, that you maybe had all the resources of someone that you wanted to, right? Yeah.

What would happen if... Can you step right into that picture looking through your own eyes and imagine being that person, having all the resources you need, being able to communicate easily? I've got a picture of it. Do you? Good.

So when you look through your own eyes, I can see that it's back there. So when you look through, can you all see where her picture is, by the way, when you're watching her? Yeah. Good. What you'll begin to pick up, by the way, as you do submodalities work, is you'll actually begin to see where the client's pictures are.

And you can actually look to where they're looking when they do this. What we're seeing is that her picture is actually way back in the room and we can see that and we're not ready to move it in yet because we haven't had it, we don't have a rich enough picture built yet for her. So when you think of that, you're looking through your own eyes. What would happen if you actually moved that picture in now and then brought it, whoa, right here to about three feet?. So with it right there, what do you think about the healing center?

I want to put my foot there. So you're ready to go on it? Yes. It's so hot up here with you. I don't know why.

I think it's just the transformation. So as you think about it now, is that something you want to get going on? Yes. Great. Good.

That's congruent. Thank you. Give her a hand. Excellent. What I really find interesting about the stoplight and golight, and I've done this with a number of clients, including clients that, for example, one client had a sort of development project he wanted to get going on, but he was unable to.

The interesting thing is when you get the picture right in the right place, the client actually gets antsy about doing it. Now that is a universal experience. That's what I mean by universal experience. That's what I mean by a submodality distinction having so much juice that the client's just got to do it. Okay?

Oh, here's another one. Have you ever been shopping for something? For someone else? But you saw something you just had to have for yourself. Anybody ever done that, by the way?

Oh, yeah, good. Do you think that would be a real powerful set of submodality distinctions? How about food compulsions? Of course, the problem with food compulsions is, you know, I'm not sure if, um, but have you ever, have you ever had something like, um, like those of you that are into chocolate? I mean, really into chocolate.

Not just a, not just a chocolate lover, but a, uh, what's it, what's your favorite chocolate? Godiva? With coffee cream? Son's got it. What's your favorite chocolate?

Godiva? With coffee cream? Sun's got it. She's got it all down. Food compulsions.

Now, if it's ecological, then certainly do you think taking and putting some sort of, if you ask your client for that, like, do you think taking something for Sun that she really, that she didn't want to do but wanted to do, wanted to want to do, you know, to put that in the same submodalities as the Godiva chocolates for her would really make a difference. How about the moment before, you know, when you're really anticipating a, yeah, one of the, like a good meal, you know? Right? That's got a real powerful set of submodalities. Values have a real powerful set of submodalities.

Just our Values. When we get to our values section, when we get to the values section, you'll really see that Christmas often is, elicits, be a little careful about Christmas. Some folks don't have a positive connotation for it. Some folks don't have a positive connotation for their birthday. Watch out for those things.

But certainly if the person is like coming downstairs, seeing the presents on their Christmas tree, that's a powerful set of submodalities. And we've talked, of course, about a belief no longer true, for those of you who took our accelerated practitioner. I think that's, we spent enough time on that one. If you can find a belief that's no longer true, you can, that's a real powerful set. And something the person absolutely believes to be true, like the sun coming up tomorrow.

Those are some real powerful submodality distinctions. And they're universal experiences. The key to making submodalities work is to find those really, really heavy-duty submodality distinctions for the client. Okay. Any questions on universal experiences or drivers?

Because I want to talk about thresholds, and I want to have an experience of a couple of drivers here. Okay, you guys want to play? Let's play. This is fun. By the way, it's not always comfortable, but I guarantee you it'll make a difference in your internal representation.

So let's have fun with this. When I first did this, it freaked me out, by the way. And by the time I got big enough, so stay with me, because by the time it got big enough, it didn't freak me out anymore. Okay? And this will absolutely change your representation, or your, it'll absolutely change your relationship to this.

So what I'd like you to do, if you're ready, if you want to, and you want to play, what I'd like you to do, we're going to, and this is, this, by the way, is, what is it? Oh, this is size. So size is an analog continuous submodality. Right? Size is an analog, continuous submodality.

So what I'd like you to do is I'd like you to imagine this big, if you were to take, let's see, your thumb and your forefinger, put them together, and then put them together, all four of them, it'd be just a little itty-bitty thing, right? The size of a slightly, maybe the size of like five pinheads together, right? And I'd like you to imagine a spider that large. And then go ahead and close your eyes so you're looking through your own eyes. Now, as quickly as you can, what we're going to do is we're going to imagine increasing the size of the spider.

We're going to increase the size of the spider so that it's the size of a dime, a U.S. dime. Okay, look it through your own eyes. Now it's a nickel. Now it's a quarter. Now it's the size of a dollar bill.

Now it's the size of a baseball, now it's the size of a basketball, now it's the size of an automobile, now it's the size of your house, now it's the size of Hawaii, now it's the size of North America, now it's the size of the planet, now it's the size of the solar system, now it's the size of all the galaxies, now it's the size of the universe. Now, come on back, just for a second. Did anybody notice a change in your feeling about the spider as we increased the size of the spider? Yeah. Was there anyone, what did you feel?

What did you feel? It still scared you when it was a basketball, and when it got to the size of the car, what, it didn't scare you? It made you laugh. So what happened there? What happened there?

Threshold, exactly. What happened there was that the spider, and we're probably, we're looking at wall chart 103, but there's a diagram on the bottom of page 41. What happened there is that the spider got bigger and bigger. This is the diagram that looks like an A. Because it's continuous in size, what happens is the spider got bigger and bigger.

This is the diagram that looks like an A. The, because it's continuous in size, what happens is the spider got bigger and bigger. Eventually, it went over threshold. So it went over threshold. Was there anyone who the relationship, your relationship with the spider did not change?

So even at the size of the universe, you, you didn't feel any, oh, but you don't, did you feel any, were you bothered by it in the first place? No, okay, all right. So you're kind of dissociated from it anyway. So for everyone else, you had some sort of, probably some sort of increase of negative K until at some point it sort of popped, went over threshold. Now, those of you who felt a real strong negative K as the size of the spider got bigger and then it popped, would you now check how you feel about spiders in general?

And notice if anything has changed. Is there anyone for whom your relationship to spiders has changed at all? Now, is there anyone for whom spiders were a problem before this and they're still the same amount of problem? So one or two, so let's say four percent of the room. So spiders, this is the same distinction on submodalities.

If we have something which is bothering a client and what bothers them is the thought of, or picture of, something which we can then shift the drivers in, what will happen is, is eventually the client will go over threshold. And for most everyone, with one time, the client will go over threshold and their relationship to that will change, and probably for you guys for whom it didn't change, you may need to do timeline therapy, or it's also possible that one more time of that would change it for you. So at some point, what happens is as we increase the size, and this is just one driver, right? As we increase the size, what's going to happen is it's going to go over a threshold, something will pop inside the person, and the kinesthetics will disappear off that. Now what is that?

This is exactly the same thing as we mentioned on the first day of changing the boundary conditions neurologically. We're actually going over the boundary of the threshold, we're actually going over some threshold boundary, and what happens is the intensity rises up and up until the threshold, we go to the threshold, and it pops and sort of disappears. It's also possible, you might have also felt the second squiggly line there as a possibility. So you might have felt at some point that the spider was not scary, and as it got bigger and bigger, maybe the size of a quarter, it got scary. Maybe when it was baseball, it was less scary, but then it got to be the size of a house, maybe it was more scary.

So it might have also ratcheted you up. Like the way a car jack will pump when you jack a car jack, it'll raise the car up like that. You might have felt the same with size. But if we were to do distance, you can't increase distance the size of the universe, can you? Well, I mean, you can.

You can take it out to the size of the universe in the opposite direction. But if bringing it closer makes it more intense, at some point there's a point where you can't bring it any closer. Okay? So then what we do is we do a zoom. Then what we do is we do a zoom.

So you want to play again? We'll do this with a positive state. Okay, we'll do this with a positive state. What we're going to do is we're going to take the zoom and we're going to have the pictures zoom in at us at 100 miles an hour. And, of course, my favorite one for doing this, especially to have clients experience the ratcheting effect of the distance driver, is the motivation.

Okay, so if you're doing this with me, could you remember a time when you were totally motivated? Can you remember a time when you were totally motivated? Can you remember a specific time? As you remember that time, what I'd like you to do is go back to that time, float down into the event, so you're looking in your own eyes, looking through your own eyes, seeing what you saw, hearing what you heard, and feeling the feelings of being totally motivated. Totally motivated, totally motivated, okay?

And when you're ready now, feeling all those good feelings, step out of the picture, turn down the brightness, make it small and dark, zoom it out away from you, and put it right up on the farthest corner from you in the room, right up like right here if you look up for a second. Just put it on the farthest corner of the room from you and make it small and dark in the size of a postage stamp. Okay? Zoom it out, put it at the farthest corner of the room from you, make it small and dark, and have it be the size of a postage stamp. And when you've done that, then go ahead and open your eyes.

Now, when we zoom it out, how many people are more motivated? Anyone? By the way, I'll do this in business presentations. I'll do this in business presentations, and I'll do this exact presentation, and then I'll say how many people are more motivated, and nobody will raise their hand, or maybe one person will raise their hand, and then I'll go, oh, you're not. Well, now you know how to demotivate yourself in case you get too motivated.

Right. Then, the converse of or the inverse of that is really interesting. So what we're going to do is we're going to do this. I'm going to count it for you. We'll do this a number of times.

What I want you to experience is the ratcheting effect of distance zooming in. From where it is, it's going to zoom at you at 100 miles an hour. It's going to hit you. You're going to be inside the picture. It'll be big and bright.

You'll be totally looking through your own eyes and totally experiencing the event of motivation. Okay? And then right after that we'll clear the screen, we'll make it a poster stamp and we'll do it again. Okay? And we'll do that again several times.

Okay, here we go. So the pictures up there on the wall is a poster stamp. Have it come at you at 100 miles an hour. Here we go. Big and bright.

You're in it. You're looking through your own eyes. Excellent. Clear the screen. Clear the screen.

Small and dark postage stamp. Up on the wall, here it comes at you again, big and bright. Clear the screen once again. Small and dark up on the wall, here it comes at you again. Clear the screen.

Small and dark up on the wall, here it comes at you again. Clear the screen. Small and dark, here it comes at you again. One, two, three. Clear the screen.

Did you all notice the ratcheting effect of increasing the motivation or increasing the feeling? How many people noticed the ratcheting effect of increasing the feeling? Good. Most everyone will. It may be that distance is not a driver for you, Joe.

Ah, okay. Okay, so it got stuck and you didn't, yeah. Of course, if we were working with an individual, we'd notice that. Okay, so what you experienced then was the ratcheting effect of that driver, or the ratcheting effect of the driver of distance. And that is a case where we have a driver which is analog but not continuous.

It's the analog distinctions that will allow us to actually ratchet up a certain submodality or pump up a certain set of submodality drivers. Okay, why am I going over this in the first place? You might ask. I'm going over this because we've actually been looking inductively once again at submodalities, and these are some distinctions which are very important because now I want to talk about the compulsion blowout. This is the end of take 13, side B.