# Modeling

Let's move on to modeling. And our modeling page is, it's in section four, and it's page five. We're also going to put up slide 113, just for fun. One time, I think it was several years ago now, I had a fellow come to me and he said, I wanted to learn modeling. He said, can I, what do you suggest that I do?

And I said to him, well, because at that point I had taught some modeling trainings with, shall we say, one of the founders of NLP. But I said, you know, there's this modeling course. Why don't you go take it? And so he did. And he came back and he said, I really want to learn modeling.

Can you help me do that? And I said, oh, yeah, just come to our master practitioner class. We'll spend about an hour and a half on it. And you'll understand it totally, and then you'll be able to do them. Because he came back from his modeling training, which was two weeks, and he couldn't really understand quite how to do it.

I'm not suggesting that we can shorten the time that it takes you to learn how to do this, but my guess is that you already know how to do modeling because you've taken all of the NLP trainings that you've taken. And those of you who are listening to the tapes, you guys have sat with me now for, hmm, how many tapes is that as I look at the box? That could be, you know, 20 or could be longer than that even, you guys. So anyway, you already know modeling. I mean, my sense is that you've got enough information to do modeling.

And let me tell you that there are long modeling trainings, and I've taught some with, like I said, some of the founders of NLP. And the fact is that modeling is unfortunately disarming, or fortunately disarmingly simple and very easy to do once you know how to do NLP. Do you guys know how to do NLP? Yes. Good, good.

Okay. Just checking. So since you know how to do NLP, let's link to what you already know. And so this guy comes back, and I said, just sit through our master practitioner training, and what we'll do is we'll use sort of breaking a board as an example of how to do modeling, and we'll get it installed at the conscious and unconscious level. So I want to talk to your conscious mind first, if I may, and I'm not going to make a lot of suggestions about your ability to do modeling while we do this, so that you can use that later.

I'm also not going to necessarily consciously install the process at the unconscious level so that you'll be able to unconsciously model it anytime you want. You know, it's really funny, when I began to, there's actually been a number of projects that I've done that included modeling. And I've done some projects which were formal. I've been actually hired by some folks, was hired by some folks to do some modeling. Those projects turned out successfully.

I'd like to tell you a little bit about those. But I think you already know, you already have an experience of some of my personal modeling projects. One of them was published in the book Timeline Therapy and the Basis of Personality as the book Timeline Therapy and the Basis of Personality, which is essentially modeling how a person forms their personality. Timeline Therapy was actually an informal modeling project where, and what happened to me was it was kind of simple. I don't know if I've told you this story before or not.

If I have, don't stop me. Don't stop me. I was standing outside of a training, much like this one, actually. And I was talking to one of our course participants and she said, you you know, I have all this anger, and I said, about this certain event in my past, and I said, oh, that's interesting. Can you float above your timeline?

She knew her timeline. And go back to, so you look facing in the past and looking down at the event. And she said, I can do that. And I said, good. Float back to directly above the event.

Can you do that? She said, yeah. I said, where's the emotion? She said, it's down there. I said, okay, fine.

Can you go back before the event happened? She said, yeah, I'm there. I said, where's the emotion? She said, it disappeared. And I went, no, no, no, don't play with me now.

Where did it go? She said, it disappeared. And I went, huh, that could be useful. So modeling, among other things, is paying attention to what your clients do and to what people do around you. Modeling doesn't have to happen to where you go model this big, necessarily important person.

There's lots of things that could be modeling. Lots of things you could just look at. And I noticed this one client of mine let go of all of her negative emotions about anger on a single event. And I went, well dang. And I'm not even from Texas, as you know.

So, I am from the south though, but yeah, Honolulu. It's the furthest south major city in the U.S. And, you know, so the anger disappeared and I thought, you know, gee, that could be useful. Because if one person can get rid of all of their anger, everyone can. If one person can get rid of a negative emotion, everyone can.

And so it became the process of timeline therapy. That's really essentially how the process came about. I was just talking to someone, noticed what she did, emotions disappeared, and I don't think, to be honest with you, I don't think if I hadn't had the training and modeling that I would have been able to recognize things like that. Another thing happened. I was sitting here, sitting and actually doing therapy with a client, and the client said, I'm not congruent and everybody knows it.

So, I was talking to the client. Now, this was, to be honest with you, this was like 1987. I'm talking to a client, and the client says, I'm not congruent and everybody knows it. That was a presenting problem. I'm sitting there talking to the client, blah, blah, blah.

And, you know, all of a sudden, he says, you know, and it's really, it's part of me that's making me incongruent. So I said, oh, oh, there's a part of you that makes you incongruent. Yeah, and I said, what's the part's highest intention? And he said, perfection. And I, you know, I said to him, you know, anything less than total congruency is not perfection.

And he went, what? I said, yeah, anything less than total congruency is not perfection. And he went, what? And I said, anything less than total congruency is not perfection. And he goes, I can't even think of that, he said.

Well, what did I have there? Prime concerns, non-mermits reverse, inductive language pattern. And to be honest with you, I'd thought about inductive language patterning, and I'd thought about non-mermits reverse, but had not codified anything on it. And he went, all of a sudden, he goes, the part disappeared. And I went, huh I wait a minute what did I say anything less than so modeling doesn't have to be big time and formal you can if you if you can and then out of that came prime concerns and out of that came quantum linguistics and because I struggled to explain why it happened, and from 1987 until probably 1993, I wasn't satisfied with my explanation, although I did have, in 1989, I taught a segment of prime concerns.

It was the first time I ever taught prime concerns, because I looked at what that client had done and thought I, and began to teach the process. So modeling doesn't have to be something that you, that you are going to go model someone formally. Now, I've also done formal modeling. I've also done formal modeling, and one of the interesting things to me, I want to just tell you two things as a result of really paying attention to certain things which we're about to discover. Um, there's two things that happened to me, and I'm not suggesting they're going to happen to you.

But one thing that happened was I started to be able to read books, and notice what was happening in the mind of the writer. Now, I wasn't able to read those books at 10,000 words a minute to do that. But I was able to read those books at a reasonably decent speed, consider what the person was saying. And I remember I read Science and Sanity and I turned to page 21 and I looked at page 21 and I wrote down a process which the top of my journal, put language integration process, and I actually wrote down the process. And I wrote down a whole series of steps, just out of the blue, a whole series of steps, and came back and actually did the process.

This actually became the language integration process. The language integration process is something that I developed that has to be done one-on-one, but actually strips off language, takes language off of the person, so to speak, allows them to literally experience themselves in the universe without language, and then hooks it back up in a way that gets rid of all the negative anchors at the deeper level. I don't like to do the process because it's very intense for the person doing it. Me, I mean. It's very intense for me, not for the client.

The client actually has fun at it, but it takes a lot of thought process and takes about maybe five to ten hours to do, so it's a rather intense process. But the weird thing was I went back and looked at page 21 and it wasn't there. You know, the steps that I wrote down in my journal weren't on page 21. But somehow, you know, I said to myself, your unconscious mind can organize everything that adheres at the unconscious level or reads or sees and And all of a sudden, a process can come out of that. That's what happened to me.

And it was simply a result of knowing these things. Now, another thing was really funny that happened because there's one more thing that came out of modeling. Modeling has been, as I mentioned, very valuable to me, personally. It's been very enriching and allowed me to develop some processes that probably I would not have otherwise done. I was actually sitting talking to, well, let's say somebody in Hawaii who knows the ancient ways.

And he was just talking to me, and I wrote down in my journal a series of steps of what later became what we called the higher self connection, which essentially is connecting up, or actually not really connecting because in the Hawaiian system you're already connected to your higher self, but reawakening the connection to the higher self. And I ended up talking to this person, and I don't know what we were talking about really, but I ended up with a series of steps in my journal about how to do that. And what I noticed was that as a result simply of the modeling processes that a series of steps can come out of it and of course I modified them along the way and tweaked them and timeline therapies changed and prime concerns have changed and become more easier to do as you guys guys have learned in this training, and the higher self-connections become easier to do. But if you pay attention, and I'm not suggesting it even takes conscious attention, but if you pay attention at some point and end up with a series of steps, you're likely to have done modeling. My great hope for you is that you'll be able to take this and anywhere where you find most excellent behavior, you'll be able to duplicate it.

And the truth is that all of our Huna trainings, all the Huna trainings we do, and we now do somewhere between four weeks of totally different material and eight weeks of totally different material that we now teach in all of the levels of Huna. And the entire process came out of my modeling either people in Hawaii who know the ancient ways or writings about the subject and actually turning them essentially into processes. So, the other thing I want to tell you is that having taught master practitioner trainings for a number of years, what I notice is that the students that we teach here actually go out and do the same thing. And, you know, I'm not going to suggest that to you, but if there were, he said just kind of hooking it in and then pulling it, is that if you were to, you know, begin to model something and ended up with a process that was useful, this might be the way that you do it. So what is the theory of modeling?

The theory of modeling is that given a specific behavior, this is on page four or five, given a specific behavior, ability, or skill that an individual can perform, one can replicate that behavior, ability, or skill in half the time it took to teach the skill originally. We start with the idea that all people are equal in terms of mental and physical capabilities, and the only differences are issues of motivation, values, beliefs, and attitudes, which drive one to be excellent, which is an independent variable in the training function, by the way, and either sticks or carrots as the motivation force. Now, the interesting thing is that all of what we have taught as NLP was created by the process of modeling. And remember we said on our first day that it's interesting how things in this training seem to come full cycle at certain points. I'm not sure why that happens.

Remember we said the first day that NLP is an attitude and a methodology that leaves behind a trail of techniques and modeling is that methodology. All of NLP came from somewhere else. All of NLP came from somewhere else. We already mentioned on the tapes the first day the notion of rapport coming from hypnosis. Before there was rapport in NLP, there was rapport in hypnosis, and it was a magical, mysterious state that no one really knew how to get to, but from time to time you'd arrive at it somehow, and your client and you would be in rapport, and they would hear only you and see only your voice and accept your suggestions unconditionally.

And NLP's great gift to hypnosis was they sat down with Erickson and figured out how he did rapport, which is exquisite. And what did they do? They just said, okay, well, here's this thing called rapport, which is what? A nominalization. And what's the process?

What's the process of getting rapport? You know, the truth is that the idea of stimulus response has been around since 1902, when Bill Twitmire wrote the knee-jerk reflex article in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Some of you remember Bill. No, you don't really, but you remember Ivan Pavlov, who followed up on Bill's work in 1904 and thus became behavioral psychology. Not Pavlov, but his work.

And, you know, the weird thing is that anchoring, the notion of anchoring, or stimulus response anyway, has been around in the literature since 1904. And LP just simply said, okay, well, we got stimulus response. What is the process by which a stimulus creates a certain response? We said, okay. And so anchoring was born.

And the notion came from, actually, they were looking at a videotape one time, I'm sure, and saw Dr. Erickson reach over and grab a patient on the foot. He was in a wheelchair, so he probably couldn't reach the rest of the patient, but he grabbed the patient by the foot and he said, every time I grab your foot like this, it will help you go back into trance. And then what they noticed when Dr. Erickson grabbed the foot, the person went into trance.

Useful. So the stimulus that causes you to create something, a pattern, a technique, may not be the same as how you put it together eventually, but one of the things that's important is that you have a reasonably good knowledge base about the thing which you're modeling. So, for example, strategies. Strategies came from Pribram, Galanter, and Miller in the book Plans and the Structure of Behavior. It came right out of the Tote model.

And strategies was NLP's way of trying to explain, anchoring was how simple behaviors occur, and strategies were how more complex behaviors occurred. So everything in NLP, and one of the things I've done personally is I've gone back and sourced or looked at what the source of each particular technique in NLP was in the literature as it was published prior to finding it in neuro-linguistic programming. But what I want to tell you is that the key, well, let me tell you, just stop for a second. So imagine this. Here I am.

I'm in a bar in 1985, and you'll be interested in this. I was in a bar in New York City. And I think it was the Roosevelt Hotel, but it might not have been. It was definitely in downtown New York. And I'm looking across the bar at the piano, no, not at the piano player. at Richard Bandler.

And I was kind of a brash sort of a student. And I looked at him and I had this wild idea, just this berserk idea. And I probably shouldn't have said it, but it was worth saying. And I said to him, you know, what if all of NLP was just suggestion, and you were keeping the conscious mind busy with the pattern while you slipped the suggestions into the unconscious mind? And he turned beet red, slammed his fist down on the bar, and said, no.

And I went, huh. Oops. I'm in trouble now. And five minutes later, he looked over at me and he said, just denominalize the word suggestion. And then I got it.

The key to modeling is denominalization. The key to modeling is denominalization. It's how all of NLP was created. And a nominalization is what? A pre-existing concept or idea which looks like a noun.

So what do we got in an LP? We got sensory acuity, right? Where'd that come from? Erickson looks at his clients. Tells his students to look at the clients.

Now it's weird. It's weird. I have to admit that sensory acuity is weird, right? Because Freud told his students not to look at their clients. In fact, they'd put them on a couch and face away from the client so they couldn't see them.

But, I don't know if you know this, before Freud, people doing therapy with other people looked at their clients. But Freud changed things and Erickson was the first person to say, look at your client. Look at your client. You can see lots of things. When we say, what did he see?

And one of the times Erickson, somebody said, Dr. Erickson, how did you know that client was in a trance? And he said, I could see the beating of her pulse on her ankle change its tempo. Huh. What does that mean?

I think that means that Dr. Erickson had some powers of observation which went beyond those of the mere student that he was teaching. So, when we do denominalization, one of the things we're going to end up with is a process. A process. Right?

Normalization means turning whatever it is back into a process. Right? Whatever you got, whatever you're looking for, whatever you're looking at, turn it back into a process. Something to do. It's going to be a series of steps.

What are the things we look at when we're doing modeling? We look at several things when we're doing modeling, and essentially what we look at is on slide 113, which is we look at the physiology, we look at the filter patterns, and we look at the strategies. That's a little simplified. Let's talk kind of specifically about this. And we emphasize different things when modeling different things.

So for example, if you were modeling golf, or rollerblading, yes, even rollerblading can be modeled, then you'd probably have a little more emphasis on physiology, wouldn't you? When they were modeling Dr. Erickson, one of the things they wondered, because I don't know if you know this, but when they met Erickson in the first place, he was in a wheelchair. And one of the things they wondered was, are we going to have to duplicate that physiology? Well, fortunately, the answer was no.

So when you do different things, there's going to be different emphases on different parts of this. So in sports, the physiology is going to be more important. In golf, for example, you're going to have to get the swing with the left arm straight when you follow through the ball. It's probably pretty obvious. That's probably pretty obvious.

But in sales, for example, you don't need to be as precise about the physiology as you do in playing golf. The filter patterns. The filter patterns include what? They include the beliefs and values. And the filter patterns generally are going to answer the question why.

And we're also going to look at the strategies. And the strategies are going to include essentially what the person does inside their head. We could also call that the mental syntax. There's an order and sequence of what each person does inside their head as they do anything. And so what we want to do is we want to find that out.

Okay, now let me just ask you guys a question. Then we'll go on and really talk about modeling here. Let me just ask you guys a question. Do you guys know how already to match and mirror people? Let me just find out.

Yeah. Is there anything with regards to matching and mirroring that you think you don't know? By the way, the answer is no. No, because in your practitioner training, what's the list of all the things you match and mirror? It's in your practitioner manual.

It's in the notes. It's like, what do you match and mirror? You match and mirror spine, tilt of the head, breathing, voice, eye blinking. What else? Gestures.

It's pretty simple, right? Yeah. Filter patterns. What does that mean? Filter patterns means what?

Metaprograms. We haven't covered those yet, but we will. By the time you understand metaprograms, you'll know how to elicit the metaprograms. Also includes the four basic metaprograms, which are in the Myers-Briggs, which we'll talk about. Actually, that's our next segment, right after this segment.

Filters are all, and filters provide the question of why. So the physiology is, by the way, physiology is what? Is the what? Yeah, what is the physiology? Oh, sorry, physiology is what?

What? That's like who's on first, right? Remember that? That's right, I don't know. You got it, Murray.

So physiology is what? What? Yeah. Filter patterns are why. Right.

So the filter patterns are the why. And the strategies are the how. So it's why, what, how. And then the what if will be when we do it. Interesting, huh?

All right. So, page 4-6. The first thing, I gotta tell you, the first thing, the first thing is you really need to find someone whose behavior is worth modeling. No, I mean really. I really mean that.

No, I'm serious. If you were to model someone that had behavior that wasn't worth modeling, what would you get? You'd get their behavior. People tell me all the time, I think I'm going to model so-and-so. I go, why would you do that?

If you're going to model somebody, model somebody that's really, really, really excellent. Model somebody that's really, really excellent. In fact, that's a big problem in modeling, especially when you, if you were ever to get hired to do modeling, as I have, oftentimes you go to model someone and you may find that they're not all necessarily that excellent. That being the case, you need to find, find somebody that's really excellent. When the U.S.

Army recruit... Actually, when modeling fails, modeling fails for two reasons. That is to say, if a modeling project doesn't necessarily succeed, it doesn't succeed for two reasons. One is that the behavior is not worth modeling, or they find someone to model that didn't really produce excellent behavior. When they did the U.S.

Army modeling project of modeling army recruiters, they did actually find out that they had to model, and they found out, and the problem is they found out in the middle of the modeling project. But what they found out was they could not model an army recruiter who'd only been in one city. Because if he was in one city, his behavior might have been idiosyncratic to fit that city, and so if he moved to another city, he might not get the same results. Weird, huh? So they had to model, but unfortunately they didn't find that out right away.

So in the middle of doing the modeling project, when they already had hundreds of hours of videotapes, etc., they found out that they had to model a recruiter that was in two cities or more and had been successful. So finding a model of real excellence is important. Now, obviously, you want to pick up a behavior such as board breaking. Just find somebody that can do it, right? Well, I mean, being able to do it is excellence, right?

Okay. And when you model this person, what you have to do is find their beliefs and values, their strategy or mental syntax and their physiology, and then you install it in yourself. Let me see. Let me just ask you guys a question. Do you know how to install beliefs in yourself?

Yeah? Do you know how to install values? Or you will, right, by the end of the training? Do you know how to install the rest of the filter patterns like metaprograms? Well, you will by the end of the training, right?

Right? Do you know how to find out someone's strategy and install a strategy? Do you know how to elicit the submodalities and do those yourself? Yeah? And do you know how to match and mirror the person?

Pretty simple. And by the way, when I've taught modeling trainings, that's all they teach. I mean, they teach you how to elicit strategies, but it's the same strategy elicitation you already know. So the number three is you install it in yourself and you already know how to install these. Step number four is once you've installed it in yourself, then you design a training that produces universal results.

I kind of think, you know, for my life, for me, where I'm at is finding out stuff and then teaching it to people. That's real satisfying for me. So designing universal training is right up my alley, personally. Because I like to try out stuff and see if it works. Yeah?

And of course, I think the stuff we tried out during this training that you guys got a chance to see, and we do, by the way, try out stuff in every training. But in terms of the percentage of success, I think we've done really good in terms of trying out some stuff and seeing what the results were. Even in the stuff that was neurological drivers and anchoring and so forth, we had, I think, a real high success rate. It was about 90%, roughly. So that's good.

You design a universal training then, and then you train others. Once you've produced the training that trains others, and you've succeeded at that, then you train trainers. And of course, we've talked about them. So let's get specific. This is the end of tape 17, side B.

Let's get specific. Page 4-7. The key elements in modeling, physiology. First key in physiology is breathing, by the way. And then get the posture.

Once you've got the breathing correct, then you've got the posture correct, then everything else sort of flows from that. In terms of the filter patterns, what do we need to know? We need to know some things. We need to know the metaprograms. That's what MP stands for in here.

We need to know what the client's metaprograms are, which includes the Myers-Briggs, which includes the four basic metaprograms, which are the Myers-Briggs. MMs in this case means metamodel patterns. One of the other things about filters is you want to find out the metamodel patterns that the person uses or which they represent with their speech. In the U.S. Army Recruiters Project, they found some very, very interesting linguistic patterns.

Very, very interesting linguistic patterns. If you actually go and model some unique salespeople, you'll probably find some linguistic patterns which are very, very unique. So meta-model. So model the languaging pattern. And values.

Values are very important. All of these together provide a key to how the person filters information, and in its most basic sense, they answer the question why. This area was, was often neglected, but it, it provides the desire, and you need to find out with regards to the filter patterns, what are the enabling beliefs and values and metamodel patterns, and what are the disenabling beliefs, values, and metamodel patterns. And then finally, the third thing you'll need to do is elicit the strategies that the person uses. Now, the other thing about modeling is that modeling is also about chunking.

It seems to me if I was going to go model a salesperson, for example, and we discovered this when we were, and fortunately, I already had some information about selling. Oh, I need to say this. Yeah, I need to say this. Before you actually go and do a modeling project of modeling someone or some behavior, probably you ought to have gathered a fair amount of information about that behavior or how to do it. For example, in the process of creating the HUNA trainings that we've created, I have read over 360 books on the subject, not just of HUNA, but also related fields.

So, my sense is that you ought to have a reasonably sufficient database in your mind so that when someone gives you a pattern or says, this is what I do, you can recognize it. For example, if you were going to model a surgeon, how a good surgeon did something, you probably would need to know something about surgery. Do you know what I mean? And I don't just mean a couple of weeks worth of information, right? So, in when you're going to do modeling, you probably ought to have as much information as you can about it.

And the other thing is you need to chunk it correctly, which is, and this comes to me when we talk about strategies, the third element. So, think about this for just a minute. If you were going to go model a salesperson, what would you model? Would you model all selling? The answer is no.

Because if you modeled all selling, what you would get is, because what does a salesperson do? A salesperson doesn't just sell. The salesperson does lots of different things. What's the first thing a salesperson does? Those of you that have been in sales.

What's the first thing a salesperson does when they go out to sell? Prospecting. Prospecting. First job that a salesperson does is prospecting, and I will tell you that that has quite a bit of different strategies, physiology, well, not necessarily physiology, but especially strategies and filter patterns, than does the second thing they do, which is cold calling. And cold calling, by the way, for those of you who've done selling, is often different from prospecting.

Right? Then the third thing is, what? In addition to cold calling, and it may have a different pattern, is making an appointment. Making an appointment, then what? Making an appointment, then seeing the person in person.

Presentation. Making a presentation. Closing may have an actual, which is asking for the order, may have another process. How many have we got now? Five.

And what happens then? Then service or reassurance afterwards. And service and reassurance could have two different sorts of ways of doing that. So in the process of selling, just off the top of my head here, there are at least seven or so different things that a person does. When we modeled this client that we worked for on the island of Oahu in Honolulu, there was one other thing, which was letter writing.

We had a whole different strategy for letter writing, because he did letter writing, and we needed to duplicate his thinking in that too. So when you chunk it correctly, you're going to end up with a bunch of different behaviors which may look like they're all part of the process, but you need to get to the level where you're able then to separate out the behaviors. And during that, you're going to have to find out the strategies and any other internal representations that go on. So you want to find out not only the strategies, but also the submodalities, I think would be another way to say it. And also, there could be some other parts of the process which don't fall under strategies, but just fall under what kind of, like, do they hold a visual picture in their mind.

For example, one of the things that comes to mind is when a client is learning how to play tennis, the most valuable thing that you can tell them when they serve is just before they throw up the ball is to have a picture in their mind of the ball going over the court, going over to the correct court on the other side of the net, and to have that be associated. That's the most valuable thing that you can actually tell a client, or one of the more valuable things you can tell a client when you're coaching them in terms of how do you learn how to play tennis. Actually, what they found, and CyberVision has done a lot of work on this, if you want to know about sports coaching, CyberVision's done a lot of different tape sets on that. And the question is, like, what does a person do in their mind, or what does one do in one's mind before the process of doing whatever you do? Okay, so that's the strategies.

It includes everything that goes on in the mind and also any of the other kinesthetic things that the person does, including tactile proprioceptive information, tactile or feeling information or proprioceptive information about that. All right, so that's, those are the key elements. Some other points. Modeling is separating what's essential from what's idiosyncratic. So a golf player may fix his hat every time before he tees off.

He may go like this. Is that essential or idiosyncratic? Probably idiosyncratic, but you're going to have to find out because probably you ought to write it down if you're doing a modeling project on a golfer and do it and then don't do it and see if that works. And that's how you do, that's how you separate out idiosyncratic behavior. First of all, you do it, see if you can produce the results, and then drop it and see if you can still produce the results.

That's what we had to do in the process of modeling HUNA. HUNA has a lot of, shall we say, mystique around it or certain sorts of ways of doing it. And some of those were idiosyncratic and not necessary, so we didn't teach them in our Huna intensives. And some of them were vital and allow for the person to transform or change themselves, and so we had to do that. And the next thing is feedback.

Like, where does the person get feedback from? What, where's the feed, what are the, what are, what are the feedback mechanisms and how do they, how do they make, um, how do they make adjustments when they do it? Okay. So there's two ways of doing modeling. The first is imitation and the other is a more cognitive approach where you do it specifically.

Imitation is just, you know, find out what the model is, do it, and then model yourself to see how you did it. For some folks, that's a little schizophrenic, you know. People say to me all the time, Ted, you know, you're so great at producing hypnotic language patterns, how do you do that? And I have no idea. In fact, when I try to think about that, it gets very strange.

Even if somebody says, well, how do you produce it mathematically? I have no idea. No idea. And so, far be it for me to model myself, but if you can, then that's... I noticed in terms of, like, when I was doing rollerblading and assisting some folks in learning how to do rollerblading, that it was possible to do, is to model myself and do it.

But in the imitation way, if you model yourself and you see how you do it, then you're going to be able to create a training out of that. And what's essential, as I mentioned earlier, is to separate that which is idiosyncratic, the difference that makes a difference, and then what you do is you consciously start dropping pieces until you find out what's essential. If the behavior disappears, then you've dropped an essential piece. Right? Now the more cognitive approach, which essentially is, I have to admit I've only done this a few times.

I can point to more modeling that I've done, more of the imitation process. The first thing to do is analyze, seriously analyze the behavior and do its component parts, get the physiology, the strategies, the why, the motivation, and then do contrastive analysis. So contrastive analysis is to, again, two things that are alike, what produces the difference. It's like what we do in submodalities, but it's with the whole package of physiology strategies and the patterns. And then the next part is, after contrastive analysis, is sensitivity analysis.

So the only way I can tell you that is kind of like it's, like if there's a certain level of brightness, if you turn it down just a little bit less, the brightness isn't enough. You turn it back up, it's enough. But that could be in terms of the strength of the beliefs or the level of the values in the hierarchy. You may have to have a certain value at a certain level for a person to perform a certain way. That's especially true in things like selling and other things that need a fair amount of motivation.

And then strategies, number seven is strategies. It's easy to do imitation modeling. It's a little tougher to do cognitive modeling in terms of strategies. When they were doing the pistol shooting modeling, they actually had to stand in front of the shooters and ask them what they were doing while they elicited the strategies. Of course, the guns weren't loaded at that time.

But a lot of the guys in the Army project got a little grumpy with the modelers because they, like for example, the marksman might move his eyes upward and to the right as you look at him, indicating that he was accessing visual recall, and the strategy elicitator would say, what are you doing? And the marksman would say, nothing. And he would say, well, are you making a picture in your head? No. Don't bother me.

I'm about to shoot. So they'd watch him again and he'd go up to visual recall. Say, what are you doing? Are you making a picture in your head? No.

Well, just sort of slow it down again and let's see. Are you making a picture in your head? Well, maybe I am. So the U.S. Army pistol shooting project was one of the more successful ones, actually.

They were able to isolate the differences between a marksman and a regular old person. And they actually cut down the training from four days to one day and saved the U.S. Army 75% of the price of the ammunition that they used to use in training, and increase the qualification level from 70% virtually to 100%. So the Army was kind of pleased with that, especially in the cutting down of the number of days of training. But it takes a lot of patient working with the person if you're going to do the cognitive approach and really do it.

And then again, you have to install it in yourself. You still have to install it in yourself. And then you have to make sure you can get the same results that the experts can get, which I'm back to the same thing, which is it's easier to model something that you know something about. So if you're going to do modeling, like for example, in the U.S. Army pistol shooting, there were three people on the modeling team, some of whom brag about it and some of whom you don't hear about.

And the three people were Wyatt Woodsmall and Richard Vandler and Anthony Robbins. And Tony had never shot a gun before, so it was kind of hard to install it in himself. But as you may or may not know, Richard and Wyatt had a fair amount of experience with guns. So they were ready, willing, and able to be able to take on the project. So, I mean, I think that if you're going to model something, you need to know enough about it.

If you're going to do selling, you probably ought to read some books on selling or have some experience in selling if you're going to model that. But model something that you've spent enough time to know about it, and then when you install it in yourself, you'll have sort of an easy go of it. I had never skied until two seasons ago. Oh, I skied when I was 12, but we had those stupid wire things that went around the back of your boots and it was cold and the skis were 17 feet tall because I was 12. Snow skiing, yeah.

Yeah, and so I went skiing two seasons ago and actually learned how to ski, and a lot of that was paying really close attention to the physiology, and I felt really good by the end of the fourth day. I did a... I did a... What do you call that? Not a black diamond?

No, what are you, nuts? I like to live. I did a, at the end of the fourth day, I did a basic slope, and by the end of the, by the end of, I think, that was good. I had not skied since I was 12. And a really tough, a little tough basic slope, and by the end of the second, fourth day, I think it was, I did an intermediate, which I kind of liked.

And so for me, without any, I think, background in skiing, that was kind of a, I felt that was kind of a win for me. I don't know how fast people learn. So when you install it in your set, when you're modeling, then you have to install it in yourself and see if you can produce the results. Just see if you can install it in yourself and do it. Mitch, you have a burning, I'm sure.

Yes, thank you. When you're modeling excellence, and that excellence happens to be more than one person, invariably, do those two people that share excellence, are they using the same? No? Not necessarily, no. What they found when they modeled the U.S.

Army pistol shooting was that there were approximately 54 things that people had in common. And when they isolated all 54 of those things and taught them to new recruits, they increased the qualification virtually to 100%. You wonder what some of them are? Sure. One of them was that the marksman had an absolute faith and belief in that the sights of the gun were absolutely correct.

And the person who didn't succeed at shooting often had a belief that the sight of the gun was off. So the first thing that the teacher would do is he or she would take a gun and screw it into a clamp and they'd shoot it at a target and prove that the sights were totally right on to the group. And so that's a belief, isn't it? It's an empowering belief or a disempowering belief. That was one of the things.

The other thing was that they found that the really excellent marksmen ran through a list of things in their mind as they shot, as they were shooting. So they'd have a list. They'd be talking to themselves as they put the gun in the hand and how they held it out. This was pistol shooting, right? So they had a whole list that they ran through in their mind.

And, of course, there was some stuff about physiology. But it wasn't necessarily the same between them, but the things that weren't the same, they were able to find out which were necessary, which were idiosyncratic by installing it in themselves and then taking them away and then being able to do it. And then, of course, number nine is you have to design universal training, which they did. And then they trained trainers, and the U.S. Army was able to replicate the success of the modeling project.

Not all modeling projects succeeded. The Stinger missile project did not succeed. The Morse code modeling project was a semi-success. This was all U.S. Army stuff.

But I think for me, and we're talking in this case about a modeling project where you're actually hired to do it. Personally, I've been real successful at being able to talk to people and pull out models. And it depends on how much time you have and how much you're willing to focus on it in order to create a model that works. There's four things you can do with a model. With the output of modeling, you can model it, you can set up a training on how to do something more effectively, or simply set up a training.

You can set up selection criteria. One of the things we did when we used to do business consulting was we found out how to use metaprograms to do selection for people. One of the interesting things about training is that, especially in business, or actually in most any situation, is that selection will beat training almost every time. So if you select the people appropriately, then the training will produce the best results. If you're selecting people that aren't particularly suited for a given job, like a salesperson, a salesperson probably ought to be an extrovert.

We're going to talk about this during the Myers-Briggs, but a salesperson probably ought to be an extrovert or capable of acting like one. Probably ought to be, depending on who he or she is dealing with, probably ought to be a censor rather than an intuitor or at least able to be flexible enough to chunk down to get specific enough. Probably, it doesn't matter whether the salesperson is a thinker or a feeler, but probably ought to be at least able to go into the feeling side sufficiently and definitely needs to be a judger rather than a perceiver so that the salesperson has a pretty high need for closure or needs to be able to learn how to do that. That's just an example. So the salesperson probably ought to be an E, S, T or an F, doesn't matter, J for judger.

And at least that's in terms of selection. Over the years, Myers-Briggs has found that those people become the most effective salespeople. Interestingly enough, a salesperson who is a really solid ESFJ Doesn't make a really good manager. The best managers are E, ES, well, in the United States, the people who end up being managers are mostly ES, T, J. And often sales managers are ES, if they're good sales people are ES, F, J.

So the transition from sales manager, or from sales person to manager the transition from sales manager or from sales person to manager or from sales manager to general manager often doesn't happen because the person isn't flexible enough to learn that. And that's all about selection criteria. So you could take someone who is a feeler and train them forever, and unless they were able to change from thinking to feeling on the feeling side, they probably would not be as effective. The other thing that you can do with modeling is you can model the man-machine interface. That's like how do people use computers, etc., how do people use equipment or machines.

And you can model the man-man or the person-person interface. Okay, so that's our quick tour de force of modeling, and I want to talk a little bit about training design once you've got the modeling done. And we spend a little bit more time on this at Trainer's Training, but again, today is about sort of how do you take this stuff out and share it with the world. I don't know if any of you are interested in that, but my point of view is that one of the most important things we can do is to get this information out from us as individuals, knowing it, to the rest of the planet. And I think that NLP and timeline therapy and hypnosis has the real possibility of, for the first time, transforming business.

That's what got me interested in NLP in the first place was in the business arena. It has a real possibility of transforming education, and it has a real possibility of transforming therapy. So each of those areas is, to me, is exciting to see how we can transform that. That's why I do what I do. So training is what we take the output of modeling and make it into.

And there are some things. First of all, chunking. We talked about this earlier. If you chunk too big, it's possible that the people themselves might get lost. If you chunk too small, people will get bored.

The second thing is you want to sequence the patterns. We're looking at wall chart 115 and page 49, by the way. You want to sequence the teaching in the same order the expert does it. Beliefs and values. There need to be, you need to find out what the supporting beliefs and values are that they have.

You also will need to remove the beliefs that, I mentioned with the pistol shooting training, one of the disenabling beliefs was that the sights were off. You want to install supporting beliefs and you can use hypnosis or submodality shifts to do that. Positive language. This is a very important part of training, at least in our little branch of neurolinguistic programming. I don't know if you know how careful we are about making sure that the internal representations are used, the positive internal representations are used during this training.

One of the things I want to suggest is that you really shouldn't use the word do not. So don't use do not, or do not use do not. One of the things I want to suggest is that you, you, you probably ought to be totally positive and supportive about what the student can do. And if you want studies to the, the effect that that changes things, remember the kids that we talked about earlier, told the teacher these kids are helplessly retarded, you'll have to, the special ed teacher's not available, they all got C's and D's, same kids, special ed teacher's not available, they're brilliant, they all got A's and B's. So the children perform based on what the teacher thought they would do.

That's not an anomaly. That has been, those kinds of studies have been repeated. And so for me, I need to sit here and be totally positive about what a student can do in my mind that everyone can learn this easily and everyone will be able to do this when they leave here. And use the positive embedded commands about that. The thing is, here's the deal.

Negative embedded commands create a need for permission to succeed. So if you use positive teaching methods, what will happen is the students will, they will believe you and they will actually succeed. Feedback is very critical. It's the most critical component of all. There are two types of feedback, immediate feedback and delayed feedback.

To train the unconscious mind, the feedback needs to be immediate. Five minutes is a rule of thumb that we use in our trainings. You need to have feedback within five minutes. The conscious mind can handle delayed feedback well, but the unconscious mind needs immediate feedback. Interestingly enough, if the person changes without feedback, it's not as effective as if they do change with feedback.

One of the interesting things that I noticed when doing NLP trainings was if you told the student they were good at something that they weren't good at, they became good at it. Now, I didn't notice this until later, but one time I was, when we owned our radio station, I had a salesperson call me up from Phoenix and she said, I want to come and work for you. And so I hired her. And when I hired her, when she came in for the beginning interview, I said to her, you know, I have never heard anyone with such a positive approach on the phone in my entire life, and that's the reason why I hired you. And when we did the exit interview several years later when it was time for her to move on, she said, you know, when you told me that at the beginning of when I began to work for you, she said, I didn't believe that I was really good on the phone.

But when you told me that, she said, it totally changed my belief of how good I was on the phone and so I was so good in prospecting because of what you said to me. So one of the interesting things is if you tell the students that they're good at something and if they're not, they will be good at it. Which is the same thing as these kids are brilliant and you're going to have to struggle to keep up with them. So it's important. Remember the basketball test?

I don't know if you heard about this. One-third visualized, one-third played pool, one-third shot baskets. The visualizing group did almost as well as the group that shot baskets. There was no improvement in the ones that shot pool. So the difference is that, the difference is that, or what we essentially say from that is that, from a modeling point of view, is that the mind can't tell the difference between, the unconscious mind cannot tell the difference between a real memory and one that is created.

And so in the same way, feedback, interestingly enough, if you give positive feedback, then what will happen is the person will change, and positively. Remember, the person only has seven plus or minus two chunks of attention, so feedback needs to be something they can handle. And it's also important for a person learning something to stay out of the correction mode. So what you want to do is chunk the training at a level where a failure is impossible, where the person succeeds at every step. If you make it too trivial, it could be too easy, which is boredom.

But if you make it so they have to stretch and succeed at each level of the training, then that's good. Number seven, visual rehearsal. We talked about that a little bit just a moment ago. Successful people do visual rehearsal each time. Dissociated and then associated.

Number eight, oh, positive internal dialogue. That's really important. Controlling your internal dialogue is really, really, really, really, really important. There's four things you can do. You can stop it.

Just shut off your internal dialogue. That's usually possible if you had been meditating for about 20 years. You can jam the internal dialogue if you want to. And a mantra does that. One of the things that Anthony Robbins did when he set up the firewalk is he has people say the words cool moss, cool moss, cool moss for the purpose of jamming the internal dialogue.

It was really interesting to me, the University of Hawaii Skeptics Association put together a firewalk the same length as Anthony Robbins' firewalks, and instead of saying kumas, kumas to themselves, as they walked across the hot coals, they said, hot coals, quack, quack, ha, ha, instead of cool moss, cool moss, cool moss, and thus, in the newspaper, it said that they had successfully proved that the firewalk was a fake. But they didn't realize that hot coals, quack, quack, ha, ha, is just as effective as cool moss, cool moss, cool moss in jamming the internal dialogue. From our point of view as modelers, it was pretty much that they'd successfully jammed the internal dialogue, which is why everyone who walked across the hot coals did it successfully, even with the University of Hawaii Skeptics Association. The content of the mantra that jams it has no, doesn't matter, but it probably ought to be a positive one. You could substitute a positive internal dialogue.

That's what we do in pistol shooting. That's what they did in pistol shooting. It was a listing of steps, but you could use positive affirmations. You may need to change the submodalities of the negative internal dialogue. And the other thing to do is give the internal dialogue something useful and something positive to do.

Okay, number nine. Using positive teaching techniques, positive congruency. We talked about that a little bit. Number 10, design small wins. The student wins and is positive at each point.

Number 11, while teaching, be a model of excellence. So that doesn't mean you have to be a model of excellence at every moment or in every area of your life, but while you're teaching, it's probably best to be a model of excellence so that the students get the opportunity to look at that. That lets you off the hook, by the way, when you go home and go to sleep, you can be yourself. Or you can be yourself while you're teaching and then go home and not be yourself. Or be not yourself.

Or, anyway, never mind. I think you get it. And then number 12, let the people laugh at themselves. It's really important for people to laugh at themselves. When they're laughing, they're learning something.

Okay. So that's a quick tour de force of training design and modeling. And what we'd like to do now is to take a short break. I think we should take a quick five-minute break. If you've been listening to this segment on the tape, I think you should probably stop your tape and go and stretch, because we're going to do the actual process that we've just learned on how to do modeling.

So if you're ready, please stop the tape now and go and stretch, and then come back in five minutes. This is the end of Tape 18, Side A.