# Strategies, Logical Levels Of Therapy

All right, what's next? Logical levels of therapy, page 235, and we're going to look at slide number 89 at the same time. Logical levels of therapy is a chunking process, which very effectively, it's a little less quantum linguistics and a little more strategy elicitation. So logical levels of therapy, to me, provides the bridge between the content of linguistics or the linguistics and the elicitation of strategies. So we're moving into something where we're actually going to begin to look at how do you work with a strategy and how do you do something in a way that will make a difference in someone's strategy without being particularly obtrusive about it?

You know, without actually getting in the way of it. And if you look at slide number 93, we use strategies for everything. And one of my theories is that all human behavior is a result of an order and sequence of internal and external representations. So there could be strategies for decisions and love and motivation and happiness and fun and forgetting and parenting and sex and eating and boredom and I wonder if that's the same. Boredom and sex.

I don't think so. Marketing. I hope not. That would be bad. Marketing and health and wealth and depression and poverty.

Everything we do is based on a strategy. So at the risk of being, let's say, a little judgmental, there are good strategies and bad strategies. Or let's put it this way. There are strategies that produce behavior that people like, like a motivation strategy and a decision-making strategy. And there are strategies that produce behaviors that people don't like.

Like what would be some strategies that people don't like on this list? Hate, forgetting, boredom, poverty, depression. All right. So the logical levels of therapy on page 235 is about how do you take out or how do you at least interrupt a strategy that is producing behavior which is inappropriate or unwanted. And so let's look at the diagram on page 235.

And this particular diagram starts from the bottom up, by the way. I present logical levels of therapy to you with apologies to those of you who have taken or know about Robert Dilt's logical levels of life, or his logical levels. There's no relationship between the two of them. This is a therapeutic technique. His was simply an explanation of essentially who we are, which we're all going to cover in our value segment, probably from a little bit different point of view.

Logical levels of therapy has nothing to do with the logical levels of who we are. This is a specific therapeutic process, and it was based on me actually taking a look at how to produce results in terms of interrupting a strategy and was based on my doing a linguistic analysis of the book Magic in Action and looking at what those patterns in that book had in common. And so let's look and see. First of all, the client's going to come to you. We start at the bottom of page 235.

The client's going to come to you with a specific presenting problem. There's going to be a problem that the client comes to you with, and they're going to state that problem in some way. Step number one, of course, is, and actually in the process of step number two, the meta model, or at least looking at the problem that the client presents to us linguistically, is going to give us the pattern. We're going to get some kind of pattern. If you're listening to these tapes and you have not yet studied or looked at the metamodel, please take a look at page 215.

Let's turn there for just a moment. Let's review what the metamodel does. There's really an excellent series of exercises and a description of the metamodel in our accelerated NLP practitioner tape set, the basic training collection, which if you do not understand the metamodel at this point, you should probably go back and review that. The metamodel consists of approximately 10 with some subsets, 10 different patterns that a client can give us, which fall into the general broad categories of distortions, which include mind reading, loss performance, cause and effect, complex equivalence, and other presuppositions. Generalizations, which includes modal operators and universal quantifiers.

And deletions, which include nominalizations, unspecified verbs, and various sundry other deletions, including simple deletions, lack of referential index, and comparative deletions. The metamodel actually gives us, on the left side, the pattern that the client might give us, and in the middle, the response that we might respond with. That is, how we might respond to one of those patterns, and a prediction of what the results would be. If you haven't studied the metamodel, you should. You probably also should read the book The Magic of NLP Demystified, Chapter 3.

If you've not yet read any book on the metamodel, probably that's a good book for you to read. It will give you a really good overview of the metamodel in a very short period of time. We do recommend that book for people that take our accelerated practitioner training. I'm going to assume that those of you listening to the tapes have already then studied the metamodel and are quite good at it and that you've practiced at it. And this training assumes that you are good at the metamodel.

For those of you here in our master practitioner training, we actually will have a review session on the Meta Model in one of our morning sessions, and if you need to review that or want to get better at that, you should probably attend that. Okay, back to page 235. So the second level of step, or whatever happens is, the second thing that happens is that the Meta Model allows us to recognize a pattern in the client's presenting problem. Metamodel allows us to notice a pattern in the client's presenting problem, and we're looking at page 235, step number two. Okay?

Step number three is where it begins to get interesting. Actually, step number three, we actually begin to ask the client some questions. And some of the questions we want to ask the client is, whatever the problem is, how do you do it, and when do you do it, and how do you know it's time to do it? These are interesting questions. I'm going to give you an example of how I've used this in a couple of different cases in just a bit.

But these are really interesting questions. When you say to the client, how do you do it, what does that do? Huh? Well, first of all, it associates the client into the state, doesn't it? And so the how question associates the client into the state.

Why? How do you do it? So the client's going to have to go into the state to tell us how they do it. What else does that do? Puts them at cause.

Right. And the neat thing is when you ask somebody to tell you how they do their problem, it makes them a teacher. Have you ever seen therapeutic processes where when someone teaches you their problem, it disappears? I mean, there are therapeutic processes out there like that. Some of you may have studied them.

This makes the person a teacher. So they're actually, in this case, what are they doing? You're associating into the problem and they're teaching you and it puts them at cause. It handles the cause and effect thing. And it also denominalizes the word problem.

Client says, I have a problem. When we say, how do you do that? We turn that back into a process. We turn the problem itself into a process. So it becomes a process that the person's doing.

So how do you do it? When do you do it? How do you know it's time to do it? Are all really good, are actually fun questions to ask. And once you've done with that, once you're complete with that stage, then the next thing you want to do is you say, teach me how to do it.

So you say, if I were going to fill in for you, let's say I came from a temporary agency and I was going to fill in for you for a day, how would I have your problem? What does that do? It dissociates the problem, doesn't it? It dissociates the person from the problem. What is this?

It's an NLP pattern. Present state associated, desired state dissociated. It's one of our standard NLP patterns, the basis of all NLP patterns, to associate the client in present state, and the next step is to dissociate them. And then we're actually going to take it all the way out to the limit by blowing out the strategy. And the way we're going to do that is once the in-step, in-process, or in-step number four, while the client is teaching us, we're going to deliberately misunderstand the sub-modalities of the strategy we're eliciting.

So in how do you do it, we're going to get a strategy. And we're deliberately going to misunderstand that strategy all the way out to the limit. Okay? All the way out to the limit of misunderstanding it. For example, a client comes and says, this was actually a presenting problem that I had with a client that I worked with in business consulting.

A client comes to me and says, he's a life insurance salesman working for one of the major companies, and he says, I'm really good at doing presentations once I have the presentation set up, but, and here's the presenting problem, I can't make phone calls. I can't make phone calls. Now, one thing we know is, and that's, by the way, that's a pretty heavy-duty problem for someone selling insurance because that's how they do their prospecting. So, already we know that the word can't means I can do the process of not, right? That's one challenge we could say, what would happen if you did?

But it occurred to me, since this guy was a Pretty successful life insurance salesman that saying what would happen if you did would only make him grumpy and, like, what would happen if you did? What do you mean? If I could, I would. What are you doing? So I decided not to use that challenge, being that I had used it previously with some folks and they had sort of, so we say, said certain things which were not particularly empowering to me.

All right, so anyway, he says I can't make phone calls. My first response to him was, and one of the things I always like to say is with clients, is because. Because. Which is a, perhaps a metamodel, it could be a metamodel question. It's definitely going to smoke out cause and effect, isn't it?

And he goes, I can't make phone calls because I can't imagine anyone wanting to talk to me. Okay, now we've got something we can work with. Most people, by the way, and before I actually figured out how to do logical levels of therapy, would have gone right on the challenge of the word can't. We would have gone against the modal operator. We might have even changed modal operators if we'd taken our master practitioner training.

We might have changed them into can't. That might have worked, but instead I took another tact, which was to say because, and he said because I can't imagine people wanting to talk to me. What have we got here? We've got a strategy, because if he can't imagine people wanting to talk to him, that means he can do the process of not imagining people wanting to talk to him. Now we've got a, we're going to denominalize the word problem, and I go, well, how do you do that?

So I said to the client, how do you do that? And he goes, how do I do that? I said, yeah, how do you do that? I mean, like, would you do something inside your head before you don't make phone calls? And he goes, uh, yeah.

Watching his eye patterns, I said to myself, he's making pictures. And he's moving his eyes back and forth across the top, which is visual construct, visual recall. So I said, so what do you do inside your head? And he goes, well, I actually said, he actually said, it's funny, he said, I actually make a picture of people when the phone rings not wanting to talk to me. First step, what do I write down?

Visual construct. And I go, well, then, do you don't make phone calls or is there something, what else, I mean, what happens next? What's going on next? And he goes, well, then I say to myself, nobody wants to talk to me. Watching his eye patterns, it's congruent, so I write down, nobody wants to talk to me.

And then I said, and then you get a bad feeling. He says, yeah. He says, yeah, then I get a bad feeling. So now we've got a strategy. Now we've got a strategy we can work with, and he's told me the strategy.

How do you do it? Then the next thing we're going to say to him is, what are we going to say? Teach me how to do it. Suppose I'm going to fill in for you for a day. Like, I was going to come over here and work the insurance program.

I was going to, like, be you for a day. What if I was going to fill in for you? I wouldn't want to, like, I wouldn't want to not do it right. I wouldn't want to forget to do it. I wouldn't want to forget about this problem.

What am I doing? Giving him embedded command suggestions. I said, I wouldn't want to forget about this problem. I wouldn't want to forget it, totally. I wouldn't want to forget to have it.

So what do I have to do to be you? He says, well, the first thing is you've got to make a picture. Now, in this case, I'm going to deliberately misunderstand what he says. And I'm going to take the picture. Now, what am I doing?

This is a pattern interrupt, isn't it? He's in his strategy. He's teaching me his strategy, and I'm deliberately misunderstanding it. And there's some very key words which I want you to write down on page 235 when we get there. So here's what I said to him.

He says, the first thing is you've got to make a picture. And I said, oh, I have to make a picture. Of what? He says, of the people not wanting to talk to me. Now, I deliberately misunderstand what he's saying to the opposite limit.

I said, oh, is that a little picture, small and dark and in the other corner of the room, taking it all the way out to the limit? He goes, no, it's not a little picture. Now here's the key words. Well, could it be and still work? Well, could it be and still work?

And he goes, what do you think he said? No, it couldn't be. Oh, okay, I said, sorry. And then, of course, as you know, I often use the Columbo approach in regular strategy. I go, oh, sorry.

Wacking myself on the forehead. I don't have the cigar that rumpled raincoat, but it's good enough, the forehead bit. I said, oh, sorry. I said, you mean it couldn't be a small, dark picture in the other corner of the room? He goes, no, no, it couldn't be.

I said, well, could the people be smiling happily and feeling really good about hearing the phone ring. And he goes, no. Now, what does he got to do to answer that question? You got to try it on. He's got to try on the strategy.

So I'm doing everything I can covertly to interrupt his strategy by having him try on the opposites, either submodalities or content of what it is he's picturing or what it is he's doing. So could it, he goes, no, no, it couldn't be. I said, well, could it be and still work? He says, no, no, it couldn't be. All right, all right, okay, okay, okay.

So then I go, so I forget. I totally, what's the next thing? I forget about it. He goes, well, the next thing is, he says, you've got to say to yourself, these people don't want to talk to me. So I said, well, could I say it in a relaxed voice like that?

And he goes, no. What do you say? Well, could I and have it still work? He goes, no. Oh, well, could I say different words and have it still work?

Like, these people really don't want to talk to me right now. What does he say? No. Well, could it be and still work? And then, we're all done.

And then the feeling goes, I said, well, so what's the feeling? He goes, well, the feeling is, he just says, I kind of, I don't feel good about it. And he goes, I go, oh, is that feeling over here in your finger? What does he say? No.

Well, could it be and still work? And he goes, no. By then, the strategy is really scrambled. So, and then, and this, by the way, may or may not be the total intervention, but logical levels of therapy is most useful, and you may want to write this at the top of the page. It's most useful when you're dealing with a behavior that you want the client to not do anymore.

Logical levels of therapy is most useful when the client's doing a behavior. So what's the behavior in this case? Not making phone calls, right? So I was doing a demonstration. I've got to tell you, this is a really funny story.

I often do this logical levels of therapy before I do a phobia, especially if I'm doing a demonstration with a client before I do a phobia. So I was doing a demonstration of a phobia using timeline therapy at Tripler Medical Hospital, and the head of psychiatry at Tripler had had a phobia for 13 years, and she had to walk up 11 flights of stairs to get to her job, which she'd been doing for about 13 years. And I did logical levels of therapy with her, and I said to her right at the end of logical levels of therapy, I said, so are you ready to get in the elevator and go up and down with me? She goes, yeah. I'm like, whoa, wait a minute, we've got to do the timeline therapy, because I was really there to do a timeline therapy demonstration.

So this logical levels of therapy, although, again, like some of the other things we've mentioned, it may not be the complete intervention, but it certainly is enough of an intervention that it will very surely loosen up the client's problem and make it very easy for you to proceed. And in many cases, it may be the entire intervention that you need to do. So what's happening here? Let's review. Let's look at slide number 89.

This is actually the right way. The reason, by the way, this starts at the bottom and goes up to the top is because this is actually chunking. So each of these is a different logical level. For those of you who are logical levels fans, the logical levels of therapy actually goes up five levels, or actually four levels above the presenting problem. So we actually chunk.

If you look at the different levels of the logical levels, or actually four levels above the presenting problem. So we actually chunk, if you look at the different levels of the logical levels, logical levels therapy actually takes the client up out of the logical levels, four levels, and then what does it do at the top when it takes it out all the way to the opposite? What does it do? What is taking it out to the limit in the opposite direction? Non-mirror image reverse.

So what does logical levels of therapy do? It's an inductive, because it chunks up four levels, non-merrimage reverse pattern, isn't it? But it's not an inductive non-merrimage reverse linguistic pattern. It's an inductive non-merrimage reverse, probably submodalities pattern, or at least a non-merge reverse linguistic pattern. It's an inductive non-merge reverse probably submodalities pattern or at least a non-merge reverse strategy pattern.

So it's either a strategy or submodality non-merge reverse pattern. What fun, huh? So we're beginning to see some common threads now through NLP, which we call the language part quantum linguistics, but we're beginning to see that a lot more of NLP may be quantum than was originally thought, or than we've originally given it credit for. So in this case, what we're doing is we're chunking up, which is inductive, non-mermage reverse, taking it out to the limit in the opposite direction. I'd like to demonstrate this process, and then we're do it as an exercise here in just a moment.

So who has a behavior that you do that you'd like to get rid of? I'm going to actually check now. Oh, I want to mention this. One of the things, and of course we teach this at the training, one of the things about doing a demonstration is oftentimes I will spend some time making sure that the selection of the person and the presenting problem is correct. The reason I do that is because when you do a demonstration, you have to demonstrate what it is that you're demonstrating, and you have to make sure that you're only demonstrating what it is that you demonstrate.

And so if you raise your hand and I don't necessarily select you right away, it may simply be that the presenting problem that you're giving me may be of a different scope or a different breadth than we want to deal with because I want to show you this pattern and only this pattern. So tell me what's the, can you tell me your presenting, what your presenting problem is? What's the behavior? You get angry when you drive. Can get angry.

Have you done timeline therapy for it? You've done timeline therapy for the anger. Hold that thought for a minute. Let's see if there's anyone else who has a behavior that you'd like to hear rid of. Yeah.

When you get frustrated, you go to the fridge and eat. Okay, come on up. Give her a hand. I'm sure no one else has this issue. This is the end of Tape 10, Side A.