# Sleight Of Mouth, Prime Concerns

All right, welcome back. So how did you guys do on your slight of mouth patterns that you worked out? So I want to hear the best. One of the issues was I don't have enough time, or I don't have time to talk to you, or I don't have time to talk about it. That's a typical business sales put-off, isn't it?

That's right. And under number 13, outcome, one thing we came up with was the issue here is not whether you and I talk, but whether or not your company can benefit from what we have to offer. That's great. That's good. That's good.

I like that. I like that. Excellent. Excellent. Our objection was doing this therapy with you doesn't mean it will work for me, and to change it to a model or change the model of the world.

A lot of clients hold that belief, and it works despite themselves. I like that. I like that, and I like the ambiguity. I like the ambiguity of despite themselves. It could be phonologically ambiguous, which is to spite yourself, which is just great.

I like that, I like that, I like that. Okay. Yes, Susan. Okay, ours was change is scary. Change is scary, okay.

And another outcome is could you imagine how you'd feel when you're living happily because of all the successful changes you've made? That's great. Good, that's another outcome. Right, I like that. So, what that does is it puts the person in the end state too, doesn't it?

All right. Ours was to do with it was too expensive. Yeah. So a counter example was that's what the last 20 people said, but they each bought one. It's too expensive.

So comparative deletion. And he says that's what what the last 20 people said when they, actually what I would say is, that's what the last 20 people said when they bought it. That's very good. That's also social proof, by the way. Social proof.

That's also, so that's also looking outside is like, what is this, what are the rest, what is the rest of the world doing with it? All right, one more. One more. Okay, it's too expensive. You're only saying it because you have not checked the added value yet.

Good. So it's too expensive, and you're only saying that because you haven't checked the added value yet. Okay, so let me just add something to that, or maybe shift that a little bit. You're only saying that because you haven't realized the added value yet. Because when they check, that's one thing.

When they realize, that's even further. Yes? That would make that a real... And then I would go right on. So I'd say you're only saying that because you haven't realized the added value yet.

Let me share with you what that is. Something like that. Excellent. Any other? Yeah, Mitch.

The reply was, that's right, it is too expensive unless value and quality are a consideration. Oh, it is too expensive unless value and quality are a consideration. I like that. That's getting mean, actually, isn't it? It is too expensive unless you like cheap things, in which case...

Did you do that one? Yeah. That's chunking down. Okay, that's good. That's good.

Those are pretty solid, hardcore sales answers for specific objections. Ian? Okay, it's, I can't afford your product because it's too expensive. Yeah. And the metaphor, pay peanuts, you get monkeys.

When you pay peanuts, you get monkeys. I like that. That'll do it. Definitely, we're done with that. We got no more objections after that one.

Because nobody wants to be a monkey, right? Who else had one? You had one? Lack of time. Lack of time, okay.

I can't talk to you. Okay. Too bad you don't have time to listen. You feel that being busy frees you from listening to new ideas. That's good.

That's good. That's definitely a move away from. We're definitely taking away the idea of new idea, and we're using that. We're hallucinating that might be the client's model of the world, and we're saying, oh, too bad because we've got some new ideas here. That's good.

That's good. Those are all good. And I would recommend, I think, slight of mouth be used, of course, with a softening frame. Pay peanuts and get monkeys might. I can think under certain circumstances when I wouldn't use it.

For example, if the client was significantly bigger than I was. Or it could run faster. You know what I'm saying? But I do like it. I do like it.

All right. So good job on slight of mouth, you guys. Excellent, excellent. So here's the recommendation for that, although you can learn the questions and they'll generate it. Take the standard objections that you find in your business or your career, however it is, whether you're in therapy or education or in a business, and take the standard objections you hear, whether it's in management or in individual interventions, et cetera, and write out answers to all of those objections.

So that would mean for the standard 10 objections, for example, for salespeople, you'd have a sleight-of-mouth sheet for each one. And once you go through and develop those patterns, those are going to be immensely valuable in terms of answering objections. So that's the real, for me, that's the real utility of slight of mouth. It really gives us a solid utility as to what can we do with this and spending a little time and putting together some research on whatever the standard objections are will definitely pay, I think, benefits. Any questions or comments then or other comments about slight ofoth?

Because we're going to sort of complete our study of quantum linguistics with the notion of prime concerns. I think we'll start with page 249. I want to go back and review those, so you might want to just stick your pen in there, and we'll go back, and what we want to look at is page 26, or or slide number 21. So let's review this because the intervention for prime concerns is essentially generating a non-mirror image reverse language pattern, which is essentially inductive. Okay, so let's review, and we're looking at slide number 21, as I mentioned, or in your notebook, 2, 6.

If the theorem is A, B, and you can take any theorem which has two parts to it, just the same way as slide amount, then the inverse would be A, not B. The converse would be not A, B. The non-memory reverse would be not A, not B. And remember I asked you as homework to run a lot of thinking through there. What happened when you ran that thinking through there?

Probably you noticed that some of the times it was funny, but you probably also noticed that it allowed your thinking to be more multidimensional in terms of what you considered when you were considering something. You probably noticed that instead of a bipolar sort of Aristotelian logic, which most of us grow up with, and it's not our fault, really. It's Aristotle's fault. He said everything is either X or not X. And so the problem with that is it's simply bipolar.

It's on-off. It's either this or that. And the problem is that quantum physics, I don't know if you noticed, but a quantum mechanical device is generally neither on 100% nor totally off 0%. So a quantum mechanical device cannot ever be at 0 or 100, so it can't really be bipolar, in which case it has to be multidimensional and non-dichotomous. So our quantum linguistics, especially the Cartesian logic, the patterns of Cartesian logic, and by the way, there's no magic in this particular chart.

There's no magic in the chart. It just happens to be that it generates some really nice language patterns for us. So, and again, the example, what would happen if you did, what would happen if you didn't, what wouldn't happen if you did, what wouldn't happen if you didn't, being examples of running through those four quadrants. Okay? So when you get a pattern from a client that has an A and a B component to it, at any time, you can ask yourself this question, what else could I be thinking of?

How else could I look at this? And that's the first part of prime concerns. That's the first part of prime concerns. How could I literally take and run the A and B through different parts of a quadrant? So a client who comes to you and says, I'm not congruent, and everybody knows it, has given us a very clear A-B package.

I'm not congruent, and everybody knows it as a presenting problem, has clearly given us a very clear A-B package. I'm not congruent, and everybody knows it as a presenting problem. Has clearly given us a very clear A-B package. Okay, so that's the first thing. Cartesian logic.

As you listen to these tapes before you get to this point, I think you should have generated enough language patterns. Of course, you've heard me use them, but I think you should have generated enough language patterns yourself so that you're reasonably familiar with this. The other thing that is important in this context then is also the symbolic logic from predicate calculus. And that's on slide number 22. It's also in your notebook on page 27.

And there are a number of connective, little connective units that hold together parts of a statement. These are all useful for creating language that is directionalized. These are all useful for creating language which is directionalized. Let's see, we're on page 27. So symbolic logic is very useful.

These little predicates are useful for producing language which has a certain direction. And I think you do remember the direction we're moving in, right? Remember the direction we're asking you to move in. We're asking you to create, using these, Using these parts of the symbolic logic or predicate calculus, we're asking you to use language which moves from specific to global. We're asking you to use language which moves from specific to abstract, and if you look at page 2.8, there's a diagram of that.

There's a diagram of how you might take a single concept and then in the same sentence move to a global aspect. So you can think of one time when you did something and it changed a lot of things, if not everything. Can't you? That's an example of moving very specifically from specific to universal. The diagram looks like slide number 24.

Okay, so now when we combine those two patterns, this is where it gets fun. When we combine both of those patterns, so what I'm suggesting is we combine the pattern of converse, inverse, or non-Maramid reverse, right? With a inductive language pattern, what happens is we get a very, very powerful linguistic construction. So what we're talking about is combining non-Maramid reverse or converse or inverse with an inductive language pattern. And that's going to be what gives us a very, very powerful construction for actually going across or overriding boundaries.

And if you're listening to the tapes, there was one of the parts integration that I did a non-merrimage reverse inductive language pattern yesterday, or previously on these tapes, where you can go back and review that. You remember one of the times when we were working with a part, I did a non-merrimage reverse inductive language pattern with some pretty good effect. Okay, so that's the review. We're going to be asking you to produce language that works in that direction. And let's talk a little bit about prime concerns.

I think probably a little theory would be in order. Prime concerns is a system or a process that became very clear to me as I was doing another process called the language integration process. A language integration process is a process that I developed based on my interpretation of the work of Alfred Korzybski in Science and Sanity. And in working with a number of clients doing the language integration process, by the way, the language integration process simply is a process that strips off language. And what it does is essentially gets rid of the negative kinesthetic associations at the deepest level of language and then allows the person to experience themselves who they are without language.

And then the language is then added back with the person or to the person. So what it does essentially is it gets rid of all the negative kinesthetics at the deepest level of the linguistic structure. Let's see how that might be. By the way, we're now looking at slide number 75. When looking at the notion of meaning, typically we use words when we have a sentence.

When we talk in a sentence, any sentence, the words themselves will have a certain meaning. So we could say, I saw the dog. Each of the words that we use, for example, I saw the dog, is going to have a meaning attached to it. Like if I were to say to you, what's the meaning of I? What's the meaning of saw?

What's the meaning of dog? You'd be able to come up with a meaning based on that. My experience of working with people doing the language integration process is that there's actually, for every word that we have, a chain of meaning. A chain of meaning. Where if I were to say to you, what does saw mean?

And you would say, well, it means this. And I would say, well, what does that mean? What does that mean? What does that mean? What does that mean?

That at some point, you would get to a point where, at a very, very deep level of meaning, you might even get to a point where there'd be, say, no actual meaning but just a kinesthetic. And deeper than that, you might actually get to a feeling. Now, that's not problematical for a client if the feelings are positive. Not problematical for a client if the feelings are positive, but for example, if we look at slide number 76, here's a client that I worked with. And what, at the top of, at the surface level of the notion of being an individual, the meaning of that was being alone, then lonely, then scared, and then a very deep level of fear.

So every time this particular client talked about being an individual, he felt fear. Now, it probably wasn't as much fear as one would have experienced if dealing directly with the emotion itself. But in this case, this was a problem. And, of course, one of my rules of thumb is if it ain't broke, don't fix it, right? But in this case, it was a problem because he was working on the issue of being an individual.

So you can see, let's go back now and look at slide number 75. There are surface-level meanings of things that we say, utterances. And the problem is that a lot of these surface-level utterances are chained into prime concerns at the deepest level, which are not in alignment with the surface level meaning. Let me just go back for a second and let me say what prime concern means. Prime concern refers both to the concerns that people have in their lives and to the process, which I've called prime concerns and have put out in a monograph called Prime Concerns, which is probably worth reading after you listen to this set of tapes.

So the theory is that people have surface-level things that they say. Words. And that there's a chain of meaning that goes down from those words. And it's very simple. If I were to say to you, what is the meaning of dog?

We're using as an example, I saw the dog. We could say to you, what's the meaning of dog? You would say, whatever it is. And I'd say, what does that mean? What does that mean?

What does that mean? And what I would suggest is, at some very deep level, that it might get to a prime concern. And that people generally have a few prime concerns that tend to run their lives. People generally have a few prime concerns that generally tend to run their lives. And that the prime concern themselves that we have are essentially what's missing.

Prime concerns themselves that people have are essentially what's missing. Now we're talking about the prime concern that people have or concerns that people have in their lives. So the prime concerns themselves are generally what's missing from the person's life that they're, in essence, attempting to fulfill. And this is represented by language. Or that it is representable linguistically.

A prime concern that is someone's prime concern. There's actually a couple of very easy ways to discover prime concerns, which is part of what this segment's about. But it's essentially one way that we give meaning to life, isn't it? It's one way that we give meaning to life, because what's missing for us in our life is going to be something that we seek, isn't it? Now, there's actually a mathematical reason why prime concerns exist at the unconscious level, and that is when we do the process of deduction.

Mathematically, when you do a deduction, you need to leave something out. And so the process of deduction, which starts from the surface level and goes to the deepest level, is actually going to leave things out. And the problem is that these things which are left out, or which are missing in a person's life, generally tend to run them, or to be something that they work to fulfill themselves, or that they look to fulfill in life. Fritz Perls had an interesting idea. Fritz was always trying to find, you know who Fritz Perls was, he was the creator of Gestalt therapy, right?

Fritz was always asking himself, what does this person want from me? What's missing in this person's life? And he had a notion of an unmet need then, in the client's past, and the client trying to fulfill the need now. So Fritz was always looking for what's the unmet need then, somewhere in the client's past, that the client is working to fulfill. And then what Fritz would do is he would actually frustrate the client on that need.

So he would, if a client, for example, was looking for attention from him, he might actually turn around and do a phone call. He might take a phone call right in the middle of a therapeutic intervention. Like he'd go, excuse me, I've got to make a call. Dial the phone. And what would typically happen, according in his system, was that the client would either have a crisis, which would be either laughter or tears, and the client would then move to a new level of order beyond the laughter or tears.

So Prime Concerns essentially goes along with the same theory, is that there are things in our past, in our life, which are missing, and that Prime Concerns is about discovering those, and then, because they are represented linguistically, and then fulfilling those, or actually allowing the client to get beyond those, using a couple of very powerful processes. Okay, so let's review. A prime concern for an individual, not the technique, but the concern, or the problems that a person has, is going to be probably found at a very deep level of meaning. And it is linguistically, it's possible linguistically to discover it by asking a couple of very easy questions. And at the very deepest level of the structure of meaning, that if I were to say to you, what is the meaning of dog?

And you would say, whatever, and I'd say, what's the meaning of that, what's the meaning of that, what's the meaning of that. For example, on slide number 75, we'd be stepping down that chain of meaning, and at some point we would end in a prime concern. At some point we would end in a certain prime concern. So, interestingly enough, since prime concerns are what's missing, the quest to fulfill our prime concerns is how we seek wholeness out there. So, prime concerns are, in essence, an attempt to seek wholeness through fulfilling what's missing in our life.

And, of course, one of the answers to this quest is that there's nothing really missing. There's nothing really missing. Since our nervous system is a hologram, and complete as it is, whole and complete, and a hologram of the universe, then probably there's nothing really missing or incomplete. So that's an illusion, essentially. And at least that's what we expect with this process, the process we're about to do, is we expect to restore the nervous system to its wholeness or to its completeness.

Now, the prime concerns are going to be represented like a part. That is to say, they're going to have a neurological structure, like a part would, and the prime concern will have boundaries, won't it? Just like the things we were working with the other day, where we went through and did some quantum linguistical patterns that we had in our handouts, and you read those patterns and problems disappeared. Because you were going back and forth over the boundaries, and you've gotten very good at calibrating boundaries. You've gotten very good at knowing where you are in the process, and knowing where you are watching the person.

And so what we want to talk about next is how to discover those prime concerns. And for that, we need to look at page 249. There are two ways we're going to suggest that we actually would elicit a prime concern. There are two ways we're going to suggest that we would actually elicit a prime concern. Slide number 77.

Let's say again. A prime concern is generally a combination of, oh, when you find the word that is a prime concern, it will be a combination of a semantically packed word, meaning the word has many meanings, and a universal experience. So when you find the word, which is a prime concern for a person, the word itself will be semantically packed. You know what that means? Semantically packed means the word has a lot of different meanings.

So if you look in the dictionary, if you look at some words, what do they have? Two lines, right? And if you look at the meaning of some other words, they have a whole page, right? So a semantically packed word has a whole bunch of meanings in the dictionary. And a word which is not semantically packed doesn't have a whole bunch of words in the dictionary.

Now, by the way, this is just part of the theory. This will generally hold true for most clients, but some clients will have prime concerns which are not semantically packed. And the other thing is it will be a universal experience, so it'll be abstract in terms of it'll be universal, like a universal quantifier, but it doesn't have to be a universal quantifier per se, but it probably will be a universal experience. And the word itself exists generally at the deepest part of the deepest linguistic structure. It'll be at the deepest part of the deep structure of the meaning.

By the way, it would take us a long time to follow chains of words down. What does this mean? What does this mean? What does this mean? So we're going to actually go through a couple of very fast techniques that will allow you to do that.

The other thing is that anything below them generally is unspeakable or ends in vague feelings. So if you actually, if you have a client say, what's the meaning of that? If you ever say to the client, what's the meaning of that? And they go, I can't. You'll notice they're right at a pre-verbal or kinesthetic stage in terms of being able to express themselves.

That means you're probably right at a prime concern. And then finally, they're how we seek homeless. Okay? Good. So the prime concern that you discover can be either positive or negative.

That is to say, it could either be toward or away from. Obviously, toward prime concerns probably aren't a problem. However, a prime concern which is a problem might be part of the presenting problem that the client brings to you. May be away from. So there are two techniques that I want to go over.

These are the two primary techniques we use in eliciting prime concerns. There are two techniques I want to go over. The first one is on page 249. And this technique actually comes from the Buddha. No, I'm kidding.

It comes from the Vedas. The Vedas. And in the ancient Sanskrit literature, it says there are three primary energies, sattva, rajas, and tamas. Yeah? And those three energies deal with starting things, changing things, or stopping things.

So, let's see, rajas deals with starting things, for those of you who are interested in the Sanskrit. Sattva deals with changing or maintaining things. And kamas deals with stopping things. So think about this, and usually our life will cycle through the three. Usually our life, in life in general, will go through the three different processes.

So usually we start things and then we change them or maintain them and then we finish them or whatever. And in life there are things probably that, or we could have an excess or a preponderance of too much energy or attention in one area, or a deficiency even. So there could be an excess or a deficiency of either or any one of these three energies. There could be things which we've started but not completed. I don't know about you and your life, but...

There could be things which are ongoing, which are but not completed, which we're unable to change or which we're unable to maintain. And there could be things which are almost completed but we can't stop doing. So I think everyone can relate to... Can't you? I think everyone in the room can relate to one or another of those.

So maybe what happens, we start a project, we enjoy the excitement and the energy of the project. Sometime after we start a project, we move into a maintenance phase where we need to keep things going and we need to change and correct to keep the project moving in the right direction. And then finally we move into a time when the project is over. And there comes a time when it really is over. And sometimes we know that the project is complete, and sometimes we don't.

Like, for example, we did construction on our house. We did actually a six-month construction project for about two years. And what I noticed was recently that there's a piece of plywood that's supposed to be up in one of the louver areas that isn't done that the carpenter was supposed to come and do. I think it was six months ago. And he said, I'll be there by Wednesday.

He didn't actually mention which Wednesday. Welcome to the world of construction, right? So that's not complete, is it? And in spite of wanting to complete that, it's not complete. So those are the three energies.

Starting things, maintaining things, and stopping things. Interestingly enough, those three energies relate to being, doing, and having. So starting things relates to being, changing things relates to doing, and stopping things relates to having. Slide number 78. So, a person who has a problem in the area of starting things, or has a problem... be unable to start things, they may also find that they don't find it easy to be who they want to be.

The client who finds it hard to change or maintain things, if there's a problem in this area, the client may be unable to maintain or change things over time. They may also be unable to do what they want to do in life. And the client who finds that they're not able to stop doing things may feel that they're unable to have what they want in life. So wall chart number 79. The relationship between starting, changing, and stopping is the same as the relationship between being, doing, and having.

What's interesting is prime concerns are usually marked by a certain set of words. In each of these areas, there probably will be words that are easy to recognize. Start will be start, be, and create. Obviously, the word for change could be maintain. If it's a problem, it could be I can't keep it going or I can't change or I can't change, unable to do what I want.

And the word for stop, I mean, one of them is out of control. Out of control. Can't have what I want. Or maybe the client doesn't complete things well. Theoretically, theoretically, each of these areas may correspond to certain personality types or certain personality characteristics.

People who are good at starting may be great theoreticians and may not do or have much of anything. People who are great at, people who are changers may be great at doing what they want, but they may not be able to be who they want or have what they want. And people who are good at stopping may be great at having what they want, but not at being who they want or doing what they want. so those are some of the possible characteristics. This is the end of Tape 9, Side A.