# Neurological Drivers, Changing Perspective, Not Knowing

All right. Welcome back. That was interesting, huh? Let's see again how many people had a moment of transcendence there. Or some moment.

That's great. Just about everyone did. That's really fabulous. That's a really nice technique of meditation. We did 15 minutes.

That was what we just did. I kind of like it because it's different. And it's also a Huna. It's one of our Huna meditations. There are a number of different Huna techniques, but that's one of the Huna meditations.

So I bring that up because from an NLP point of view, I think it's important to be able to access that kind of neurology. I think the more neurological choices we have, the better. Anybody have any comments or questions about what we just did? You guys are too zoned, I think. We could use a reframe for that, though, like there's no such thing.

When we did the eye-tracking patterns yesterday, I found that accessing the visual upper quadrants that I got pain in my head and doing the eye roll-up, it was doing the same thing. So what I did was just did it once and tried to get a memory of it and keep it there. And how did you do? Great. Good.

Good. You could actually pay attention to the light in the head without rolling the eyes upward. Yeah. And if you did that, that would be sufficient. And probably after a while, your eyes will come down anyway.

Good. Yes, Mitch. The light that I saw looked like the filament in a light bulb. It was like a little squiggly white. But I could only get it and maintain it if I kept my fingers up under there.

But at some point, I guess about halfway through the tape, all of a sudden I just got hit in the face with all this white, and it just moved me right out of there. That's what Dion Fortune talked about, about the inner light. And I just kept trying to gain that back, which I never did. The operative word is trying. And of course, the operative word is trying.

And one of the things you need to do in meditation is not to try and not to have any sort of idea of what you want, but just let whatever happens happen. It was so impactful, it almost brought me right out of it. Cool. It just hit me right in the face. Very good.

All I could see was white. Excellent. Good job. Good job. You are the Buddha now.

You will sit on the stage next. Yeah, any other comments or questions? Well, good job, you guys. Really high, high level of transcendence. It's also a good meditation to improve eyesight.

We've had some clients who've had some eyesight improvement. Why? Because it has you paying attention to the finer and finer levels of light through the neurology. So it all, doesn't your eyesight feel, doesn't it seem a little sharper right now? Yeah?

As you look? So it can improve the eyesight, and of course, all the studies that I've done, and a lot of the people who are writing about it now, say that eyesight is mostly insight. Eyesight occurs mostly inside the head, so this is a real good technique for that too for those of you who are interested. Okay, so meditation is an internal submodality distinction. The process of meditation is an internal submodality distinction.

And one of our theories is that there are some neurological drivers that are directly wired into the nervous system that stimulate certain characteristics of the nervous system through the set of neurological drivers that belong to that. So we're going to look at page 419, slide number 109. So we're back to this issue of Hakalau, which also comes from Huna. And as we begin this section of advanced submodalities, entitled Using Neurological Drivers, I'd like to acknowledge some folks. Hakalau was developed, or I'm indebted to the following people for the development.

I'm John Overdurf, Julie Silverthorne, and Susan Chu, who assisted and put together certain concepts as we, all of us, I think, have been working sort of jointly in the process of developing this as an intervention. The ancient, actually all of the ancient cultures on the planet teach peripheral vision as a very powerful state, and the kahuna of ancient Hawaii were no exception. It was actually highly prized as a state that allowed the kahuna to be in a centered, calm state. The process of using your peripheral vision primarily teaches you how to enter into a deep trance while maintaining a state of heightened awareness. Now, as we mentioned earlier on, and we'll say this again, think about it for just a minute.

If you're focused in on the central part of your vision, which is, when does that happen? It happens when we're in sympathetic nervous system arousal, doesn't it? Have you ever been in a real stressful situation and noticed that your vision can actually close right down? How many people have ever noticed that? So, would you think that peripheral vision would be the opposite of that?

Well, the answer is yes. So, in a stressful situation, if our awareness can close right down to a point and we can lose awareness of all those things around us, then it would stand to reason that the opposite of that, the non, if I may, non-mirroring reverse of that, would stimulate another part of our system, and indeed it stimulates the parasympathetic system or causes parasympathetic arousal. Peripheral vision is panoramic instead of tunnel vision, so we're actually taking the thing we were focused on. See, when you're focused in, in foveal vision, you're getting a detailed vision of that which you're focused on, but what do you lose? Context.

In addition, by moving from content to context, you also may, in some ways, blow out boundaries or at least give yourself a greater experience of context or other choices. So it would seem that this state of Hakalau that the ancient Hawaiians got into was really, really, really a powerful state. And as we move along, what we're discovering is that there are some personal applications for this, which are extremely powerful, and some therapeutic applications, which are extremely powerful. And interestingly enough, we're right in the, I would say, a really early stage of research and development. And this is the first time we've actually taught this to, that I've actually taught this to NLP practitioners, or I mean you guys, master practitioners, and asked them to go out and experiment.

So we're going to ask you to let us know how this goes and report back to us, but we've been using this for a while, a couple years, and we've had some really positive results for it, some really encouraging results. So I'd like to share with you some of the things that we've discovered along the way and look and see what some of the applications then might be. So if you look at page 419, the difference between foveal or central vision and peripheral vision or Hakalao is that foveal vision is tunnel, sympathetic arousal, and detailed information. The peripheral vision is panoramic, parasympathetic arousal, and contextual. Ernest Rossi, in the revised version of the Psychobiology of Mind-Body Healing, says that healing is mediated through the parasympathetic nervous system.

Healing is mediated through the parasympathetic nervous system. Think about this for just a minute. It's easiest to remember if you think of the sympathetic nervous system, and this is a generalization, it's not 100% this way, but think of the sympathetic nervous system as being stress, and the parasympathetic nervous system as being peace. That's the easiest way to remember. So sympathetic is stress, parasympathetic is peace.

The P and the S, right? So if we assist a person in going into panoramic or peripheral vision, shouldn't we stimulate the parasympathetic nervous system? And in doing that, aren't we going to heal some things and aren't we going to make some changes at the unconscious level? Well, the answer is we are. In fact, where we're at at this point is that, and my belief is that, hakala, or peripheral vision, actually makes it impossible for you to hold a negative emotion in consciousness.

Or if you hold a negative emotion in consciousness and you're in peripheral vision, what will happen is the negative emotion will be dissipated or released. And in many cases, it will be released in a way which is rather quick. So it's an interesting process. And so the first technique we're going to learn is on page 419, and we call it changing perspective. The first technique is for the process or the purpose of changing perspective, and it's most useful.

You may want to write this down. It's most useful in the case of when you're working with, and you need to change perspective with regards to a person or a condition. So changing perspective with regards to a person or a condition. First thing we're going to do is identify the problem. We're going to identify the context and or the object of reference, A person or a thing.

Like what kind of examples could we have here? Someone who thinks of another person. Like if you think of another person and you get upset. This is really a good technique for that. Could be your boss.

A person who thinks of the boss and gets upset or feels bad. Could be mother-in-law. Thinks of mother-in-law, gets upset. Se sees mother-in-law, gets upset. Or it could be that you, for example, this has also been useful for someone who has to go to court, for example, and face a lawyer from an opposing side.

So it's really good for pre-programming in state control. Here's another possibility. A condition like, for example, you're at work and maybe the boss piles too much paperwork on your desk and so you get upset. Whenever you get too much paperwork, you look at the paperwork and get upset. So that's sort of the context in which we'd use this changing perspective technique.

Yes? The question is, could you use that with kids who go in to take exams and they get really nervous taking the exam? You certainly could, but remember that if you've taught the child the learning state in the first place, which is my theory, is that the child would already be in the learning state when going in to write the exam, so they wouldn't be nervous. But you could use this in the meantime also. But my guess is if the child's in the learning state, which is what?

This, peripheral vision, that the child already will be in a state or a condition where they won't get nervous. So my sense is that you'd also want to teach them how to do the learning state. Okay, what are we going to do? We're going to identify the problem. We talked about that.

Then we're going to teach the client peripheral vision. We're going to have them focus their gaze and expand their awareness to the peripheral. And also, you want to calibrate for the jaw. At this time, you want to calibrate for the jaw being loose. So not tight necessarily, but, and not hanging open so the drool comes out of the mouth, but somewhere in between there.

And you want to calibrate to the physiological shift from sympathetic to parasympathetic. So how would you notice a physiological shift from sympathetic to parasympathetic? When you look at a client who's in the sympathetic nervous system, generally you would find a client whose hands were cold and there would be less blood in the skin, especially around the area of the face, that you could see. Those are the two. So if you shake hands with a client and their hands are cold, they're probably in the sympathetic nervous system.

The calibration of the shift is the hands will get warmer, and I don't know if you'll be able to touch the hands as you're doing this, but at very least you could also calibrate the skin color, and the skin color, there'll be more blood in the face. So the face will be a little more darker or a little more red. And when you calibrate that, you can anchor the state. Once you've got the state nicely anchored, then you associate the client to the problem and fire the peripheral vision anchor. And you want to condition this three to five times.

Step number six is a test. Step number six is a test. If you're interested, you might want to just write the word test there. It's a test of, we're going to go into three different perceptual positions. For those of you who have studied perceptual positions in your NLP practitioner or have heard about them, these are they.

The perceptual position of self, so clients going to be in themselves in the in the situation notice what they notice they're in peripheral vision then you have them float outside of themselves and into the space occupied by the other person notice the caveat there if you're using this for trauma then delete it and we're going to get whatever learnings they get as they look back at themselves in this situation, and then have them float up to the ceiling and look down on the relationship between the people, if it's people, and be the observer, and also get whatever learnings they get there, and then we're going to future pace. Okay? So what I'd like to do is demonstrate this, and then we'll do it as an exercise. So who has a person which when, or a condition, which when you think of the person or condition, you get upset? So this is another person, a woman, who was flirting with your fiancé.

And is it all right with you to feel okay about her? Yeah, it's also like how I handle the situation. Oh, so you also feel bad about how you handle the situation. Okay, why don't you come on up and give her a hand. Okay, Rebels, so let's see.

Is it all right with your unconscious mind to, you know, let go of this? Yeah. Yeah, great. All right. You have anchors on your hands somewhere?

Yep. All right. Let me just sort of pick a space that I can anchor this on. All right. Why don't you go ahead and pick a spot out there to look at, and then just go ahead and go into, just focus on that totally.

And then go ahead and just notice that your awareness begins to expand outward. Good. Come on back. That's good. Want to do that again?

So just pick another spot. And this time, just make sure your jaw is relaxed. You don't have to have your mouth be open. Just make sure your jaw is relaxed. And just go ahead and focus on a spot in there.

That's good. And then just let your awareness expand outward. Until you're all the way expanded, even all the way out to here. Great. Great.

Okay. Come on back. All right, let's see. So what I did each time was calibrated her for going into peripheral vision. As she went into peripheral vision, noticing the shift in her skin color, skin tonus, also in her eyes, her pupils, focus, et cetera Calibrated that as she went into the state, then anchored that.

Did it twice to make sure that we had it conditioned. Let's see. Can you remember the time when, as you think of it, it gave you some trouble? And can you actually sort of go back and think of that context? And at the same time, you can tell me when you're there in terms of the context.

Okay, and then just sort of allow your awareness to expand outward into the peripheral. What I'm calibrating here is some really nice integration. I don't know if you're calibrating from where you're sitting. Some nice integration as we notice the integration occurring. It looks like it's kind of set there.

Come on back, Rebel. Hi, welcome back. Those are nice torches outside the window. It's kind of dark here, isn't it? This is Kona.

Those are nice, though, aren't they? Very nice. Very nice, okay. All right, let's try it again. Can you think of the situation where and how you acted?

I guess that's primarily one of the things that concerns you. Can you think noticing the shift from sympathetic to parasympathetic functioning. What we're noticing is more color, more color from here up. Okay, let's see one more time. You know, maybe, you know, whatever, however you acted, whatever you're thinking of in terms of the time.

Go back to that. Just notice what happens when I do that. Notice a nice shift in breathing, a nice shift in the skin color and the face. All right, so let's see. And this is a test.

So can you go back now and remember that time? Go into your body this time. And just float right down into your body. And notice, as you remember that particular event you've been working on, or as you look out at her. And what I'd like you to do is be in peripheral vision in your body, looking out at her.

What are you feeling? Is there anything? What's going on? What learnings are there? Are there any learnings there?

What's different about it? Just how I feel about it. Yeah? It's different. It's different?

Yeah. Okay, let's see. Why don't you float out of your body now? Stay back there in that event. Why don't you float out of your body and float over into the space that was occupied by her body and look back at yourself.

Whoa. And look back at you. Is that weird? Yeah. It's like, do I have to?

Did you do it? Yeah. Okay, good. Why don't you float up and look down on the two of you from the ceiling. Notice whatever learnings there are.

What is there to learn from this? What is there to learn from this? Yeah. As you look at the interaction between the two of you. Okay, good.

Come on back. Okay, final question. Do you like those torches? Yeah. That was another break state, by the way.

Yeah. Good. Okay. Let's see. A time in the future when you might run into her again.

What's up? What's going to happen? How do you feel? Not quite so sure. You're not sure about...

But better. So what's the difference in how you feel about her? Or about the situation? I kind of think silly. So when you think of it, you may not be sure about her, but do you have more resources yourself for dealing with the situation?

I mean, obviously I would think from an ecology point of view, you do want to pay attention to her. Yeah, yeah, definitely. And what's going on with her. Right? But how about yourself?

What kind of resources? Do you feel like you have additional resources or additional awareness or additional... Yeah, more awareness....context? Yeah, more awareness to deal with that. So why don't you go out to the future, to a time in the future when you might have to deal with something like that and notice if you're happy with the way you handle it.

Yeah, it's even better. So you're more comfortable with the way you handle it? Yeah. Good, good. Do you feel like you have additional resources to deal with whatever situation might come up?

Yeah. Good. Good, good. Okay, good. Good job.

Thank you. Give her a hand. Thank you. This is a useful way of allowing a client to gain additional perspective while also being in a more expanded awareness. Her experience of the thing changed so that she felt that the process was silly.

So we've got at least some, it seems to me for us to take away the caution about the other woman would be inappropriate ecologically. But at least she's at a point where she's got greater resources and feeling a positive state about the interaction with this other person, which I think is very, very important. Questions about the process? It's pretty well laid out on page 419. Can you feel the hands get warmer, I mean, physically, as you're touching them?

I was just doing the anchoring, but you could see the shift in the physiology, could you not? Yeah, and she'd also go through a really good shift in breathing. She'd also do a really good shift in breathing. Can you feel it yourself, though, while you're touching them? Can you feel it raise up in temperature?

You can, but she was going back and forth between, she was actually going into parasympathetic each time we did it. Did you notice? Yeah. You could feel it at that point. Did I feel it just then?

No. And I really wasn't paying attention to it. I was more paying attention to the precision of the anchoring and making sure the pressure of the anchoring was right. So, but you will feel, you can feel, you can feel the shift. I felt the shift from sympathetic to parasympathetic with clients with whom I was doing timeline therapy.

The client comes in, and oftentimes their hands are cold. When they leave, you shake hands goodbye, and you'll definitely feel a shift in the temperature of the hands. So you can definitely calibrate it when they come in. Right? Right.

What I didn't catch was when you did the ecology check, you had her go into the other person's position. And look back at herself. Right. And get whatever learnings were there. Were you keeping, was she supposed to be in peripheral at that point?

She was also in peripheral vision. And also above. And also above as the observer. So we had a real solid shift in terms of her own state, and I think that was good. So there's definitely a difference there.

Other questions? Good. All right, so let's go ahead and do this. You can, depending on where you're at, use a kinesthetic anchor or you could use a visual anchor by having your hand be in the client's peripheral vision to hold that out there if you wanted to. That's another way you can do it.

You can run it up to as many times as you want to. We did ours three times. If you feel like you need to do it more times when you calibrate the client, do it more times. Because what we're doing is we're integrating the peripheral vision into that state or that time when the client was doing it. So go ahead and do that.

That should be about a five minute exercise per person. Fifteen minutes total. Groups of three, two groups of two. And if you're listening to the tape, go ahead and stop the tape now and do that exercise. Okay, how did that last exercise go?

Good. Page 420. Slide number 110. So Hakalau is also the state of being able to, peripheral vision, Hakalau is the state of being able to take something from the material realm into the void and back and forth. Now think about this for just a minute.

According to quantum physics, you create your universe based on your observation. We started with that premise. We talked about that first day or second day of the training. So if you didn't know something existed, it didn't, right? Okay?

So by knowing something, you actually create it. Is that right? Right. Okay. So at the same time, knowing creates boundaries because in order to know something, you have to not know something.

In other words, in order to know that something's a problem, you have to also not know something and you have to also know that something else isn't. So knowing itself creates boundaries and can limit your choices because you're not in touch with all the other infinite ways of knowing. That's philosophical. You want to do the process. The process goes like this.

We're going to show the client once again how to go into Hakalau and anchor it. And then we're going to ask the client, and this is fun, ask the client, what's the problem? And then you're going to have the client get in touch with how you know you have that problem. And then you're going to have the client get in touch with how you know you have that problem. How you know you have that problem.

Or how you know you have that as a problem. And fire off the anchor. Okay? And, and calibrate for the integration. While you're doing that, while you're firing off the anchor or somewhere in there, suggest the positive learnings.

That's an optional step, but because, you know, one of the interesting things about Hakalao, since one of the things we say neurologically is that the void is a location of infinite potentiality, it often occurs that you, without even having suggested that the client get learnings, will get learnings. Especially since the context expands or actually, actually dissolves. So this process, we're gonna use for, you can use it for single negative emotions or behaviors or problems in situations that involve more than one emotion. And the key is the client's ability to get in touch with the whole problem. Technically what happens is that this technique works by lighting up and removing the boundary conditions of the problem, dissolving it into the void.

Okay, that's what we're, that's what we're about to do. Okay, so you get the learning. Step number five is the client has, we do a break state. And then we, you repeat steps two and three, get in touch with how you know you have the problem, until the client can no longer access the problem. Okay?

Steps two and three, until the client can no longer access the problem, and then test in future pace, and you may also want to elicit new options. Okay, so this time groups of two, five minutes ap minutes apiece five minutes apiece if you're listening to the tape and go ahead and stop the tape now and do the exercise this is the end of tape 15 side B