# Quantum Values Intervention

Before we actually do an exercise, and we are going to do an exercise, I want to demonstrate the other interventions that are necessary in this regard to do when you do it, and then I want to have you all get together and do that as an exercise. But I do want to demonstrate some other things along the way. Is that all right? Yeah? Okay.

Matthew. How are you today? Since you shared with us your... Since you shared... Did you bring your values with you?

He says, yeah, I brought them with me. You carry them with you often? That's good. It's like the boards you guys carried with you the first week, right? No.

No. No, it is like the boards because with the boards you knew you were going to have a breakthrough. Yeah. And you did have a breakthrough, didn't you? Yeah.

Okay. Can I look at your values? You can. Let's see what they say here. Whoa, I hear some nods here.

I actually hear them. I'm reading this and I hear them. Compatibility with belief is a way 90, whoa, not being highly stressed. Can I read these? This is your career, right?

So compatibility with belief is 90% away from not being highly stressed. This is the second value is 100% away from not being rejected is 90% away from not being highly stressed. This is the second value, is 100% away from. Not being rejected is 90% away from. Not being controlled is 100% away from.

Fabulous. This is the top four. I don't need to go much farther than that. Thank God. I don't.

All right. So... I was just thinking, it's a nice day. It's a nice day. No, it's not time...

I'd rather be out there. It's not time for a break state yet. Oh, damn. Almost, though. Okay.

Okay, so these are your values in the context of your career. Job, yeah. When I was thinking with career, it's just that every time career came up, I get really confused, because it's not a career, it's just a job. Yeah. And it's not a career.

Now, what is that? See, it's interesting that the client would use those words, and even if Matthew hadn't given me definition of what he just said, it's interesting he would use those words because I'm going to want to know what's the deal. Now, what's the problem with job versus career? Short term, for sure, but what's another problem with it? Not motivational.

There's more here you need to know. What's the size of the context of job versus career? Exactly. So the problem with having a job and not a career is a contextual issue, isn't it? So that's definitely a contextual issue, isn't it?

Right? So that's a, that's definitely a contextual issue. So, in this case, I'm going to ask him some questions about context. So, this is great. So when you, I love this.

So, when you think of your job, you're fine. And when you think of career, you get confused. No, when I think of career, I'm fine. I haven't got it. It's like a career is what I want.

I can see where I want to go and what I want to do. And when we first did the exercise, I was getting into what I want in a career. But that's not what I've got now in a job. So being really honest, when we went back and did it, I had to restructure all my values to actually say what I had in a job, and that's what was really hard. Fabulous.

This is great. So do you know what you want to do in your career? Yeah. Because earlier you said that when you thought of that, you brought up confusion for you. Just a few moments ago, you mentioned the word confusion with regard to...

Well, when I was using it, going into my values in my present job, you said, what are your values now in the job that you have? When I think of career, I get confused because I don't have a career in the job that I have now. Great. If I look at the values that I want in a career, which was when we first did it, then I was looking at the values I want in a career, and they're very much different to what I have in a job. So let's just, because this, by the way, is not an unusual statement that someone, if you're doing a personal breakthrough session with this person, this is not an unusual statement for the client to give you.

So can I ask you, Matthew, just if you would, to pick a spot on the wall to focus on, and as you do that, just sort of allow your awareness to go into the peripheral. Good. Good. Now I'd like you to consider, if you would, just consider your job and And what's important to you about your job? Matthew's jaw loosened there, first of all.

And I didn't tell him to. His jaw unclenched. Then we had a real shift. He shook his head, and then we had a nice shift in color. And he's still sort of smiling and thinking.

The first thing that comes to mind is that I don't want to be there. Yeah, good. Good. So let me just ask you a question about job. How has anything about your job changed?

Since when? Just right now. I'm just testing here. I don't feel anything, Hans. Great.

Okay, so what I'd like you to do is pick a spot on the wall to look at again and let your awareness expand into your peripheral vision. And then what I'd like you to do is once again to consider your job. And also consider what's important to you in your job. And tell me when you're considering that. Good.

Now I'd like you to consider the relationship between that and your career. And notice what learnings there are. Matthew's nodded his head a couple times since he's been processing. Now we're getting just a little bit of a color shift. Once again.

Not only, by the way, I'd let the client process this without talking to him, but let's talk to Matthew a moment and see where he's at. So now what's changed? Anything? Yeah. Really?

What's up? Well, one of my values is actually having the money to learn more and do the trainings I want to do. So I've got a bit of a conflict because part of me wants to go straight home and resign, and the other part of me says, no, I can't do that because we need the money to do this just at the moment, but we're getting there. Okay, so the current situation is that your job is a stepping stone to what you want to be doing in a career. Yep.

But you do seem to have sort of a conflict about that. Oh, yeah. So there's part of you that... What? Well, there's part of me who believes I can do much more than what I'm doing presently, and another part of me which says, okay, but you need to survive and is too afraid to take that step out there.

Okay. So I wonder if I could talk to the part of you that, and for those of you that want to follow along with the process that we're about to do, we're looking at page 332. I wonder if I could talk to the, I want to talk to the part of you that, well, there's a couple issues. Let me discuss this first of all. And the reason why we're discussing this is I want to see if we can light up some additional neural networks for Matthew, just to see if there's any...

Good. Matthew took off his watch. That's good. So I wonder if we could talk to the part of you that... Well, actually, I want to do this first.

So there's something about the context of your job that isn't allowing you to experience that as being part of your process of building your way to your career. Yes. Now, does either of those parts... I don't know, but is either of those parts involved in that, or is that? Yeah.

Which one? The part that's too afraid to let go. So I just want you to know, I thought that intuitively, and I wanted to get a verification. Normally, if I were working with a client, I just would have talked to that part, had the part come out on the hand first. That was my intuition, and so I wanted to check that out first.

And which hand do you think that part would like to come out and stand on? The right hand or the left hand? The left hand. The left hand. Okay, great.

That'll do. Fine. And what does it want to stand right there? It doesn't really know, but yeah, it will stand there. It doesn't really want to come out at all.

Well, I appreciate that part's willingness to, because I know that it has some intention and some purpose behind its behavior, and we just want to communicate with that part and discover that. I wonder if there's a part with which this part here, I wonder if there's a part with which that part's most in conflict with. Say the flip side of the coin, the opposite number. And I wonder if that part would come out and stand on this hand here. Would it?

Would it like to stand right there? Right in the middle. Right in the middle. Great. Okay.

So this part has a certain intention and so forth. And I wonder if I could talk to this part here for just a moment and ask it what its highest intention is for the behavior that it's producing of survival. For what purpose? Matthew, while he considers that, by the way, his hands are actually sort of moving up and down, and notice that we're actually going out to, hopefully, to expand beyond the context of... To live.

Yeah, yeah. Good. For what purpose? To experience life to its fullest. And that will...

If you are experiencing life to its fullest, what will you have? Everything and anything I'd ever want to have. I'd be unlimited. I can do what I want, when I want, how I want. Cool.

Can I talk to this part for just a moment? What's they the same? Pretty much, huh? Yeah. Huh.

I don't know if you notice this. Do you notice your hands are moving together? Did you notice that? Yeah, slightly. Okay, just checking.

It's winding up. I wonder if these, I wonder if these parts, you wound it up. I wonder if these parts, I wonder if these parts notice they were once part of a larger whole. Do they? I mean, if they have to go however far back they have to go in your memory.

Yep. They were, weren't they? Yep. Were there any other parts that were once part of that larger whole that would like to join in? I had to do that quickly because his hands are moving together actually quite quickly.

Yeah, everything else. Great, okay. Well, why don't you just have them go ahead and... That's Matthew laughing, by the way. I hope so.

Big color shift and the hands are coming together. Matthew, just allow those hands to come together. That's really great. That's really great. And notice as you just sort of take those hands right up to your chest and that the parts sort of go.

That's right. Just sort of integrate at the unconscious level. Matthew's experiencing some bilateral shifts that are going on, a little movement in his arms and some movement in his eyes, which is not unusual in parts integration. And we're going to have to say something about the shift that's occurring for him as he allows all this to integrate. He takes a deep breath.

I actually turned off his microphone because he had his hands right close to it, so he didn't have to worry about that. And there's just some... And it's actually not quite integrated good because there's still some stuff going on with the arms as they sort of have micro muscle movements. Okay. Or maybe less than micro.

Or macro. Good, Matthew. that's really good. Do you mind if I say, that was a big one. Wasn't it? It's easy for you to say.

Whoa. It's a nice day. Nice day. Thanks for doing the break state for me. I appreciate that.

Yeah, clear sky. Tell me about your job. I work in the government. Yeah. It's getting me where I want to go, you know, learning things in my job.

Yeah. But it's not where I want to stop and I want to quickly move on to bigger and better and brighter things for myself. So... That's not popcorn, is it? No.

No. Okay. So what's changed about your job since we've been sitting here? What's changed about the job? Is there anything that's changed for you?

Your beliefs? Anything that's changed at all about your... Yeah, I actually want to move on to something else much more than stay there. Even more now. I've always felt stuck in it.

How do you feel now? Compelled to move forward. Good. So, whereas before, what? Stuck.

Yeah, I felt just really stuck. Excellent. There's a little bit of that feeling in there, but there's much more of a compelling need to move. Excellent. Before you get ready to move on, as your physiology just showed us, I'd like to ask your unconscious mind to preserve whatever it was you needed to have learned from everything we've just done.

Whatever learnings need to be present there, whatever learnings need to happen. And allow your unconscious mind to integrate all this to my way of sleep. And tomorrow, perhaps, you'll have a plan that allows you to be able to make changes easily and comfortably while taking into account everything you're doing as well as your future plans and being able to move forward in that way. Yeah. Yeah.

Now. Now. As soon as you said it, it's like, hey, it's here. Just read it. Great.

Good. Okay, give him a hand. Thanks, Matthew. Good job. Oh, let me give you these.

I'm not sure that it'll matter anymore, but I just want them. And truthfully, by the way, the next thing I would do is to, with a client, with Matthew, if Matthew were working together, is go back and re-elicit the career values now. Because what I felt as we talked to Matthew a moment ago was that career and job were not integrated. The job he had and the career that he wanted were not integrated as being. And so whenever there's a non-integration like that, there's always a possibility of conflict.

Do you feel like they're integrated now? The integration is still going on. Fabulous. Okay, so just allow the integration to continue, which is why I gave him the suggestions about tonight while you sleep. But as that part integration occurred, parts integration occurred, and the other parts sort of came in, Matthew's going to have a tremendous shift, and what we'll do is we'll talk to him tomorrow, although unfortunately not on the tapes because we're concluding our master practitioner training today, at least the master practitioner NLP part is concluding today.

For those of you who are listening to the tapes, we are going to go on in this training and go through timeline therapy and hypnosis. An integral part of this tape set, if it was not included with this tape set, will be the timeline therapy master practitioner training and the hypnosis master training. So if you don't have them, you should probably get them, although they may have been included with the tape set that you purchased. Any questions about the intervention that we did with Matthew? Let me just explain what happened from my point of view.

Peripheral vision, or Hakalau, is often a quick way to get a shift, and sometimes when you do that, it's indicated that something else is necessary. For Matthew, just simply based on what he said, parts integration was indicated next. I think that was pretty obvious to you guys, right, because he said part of me this and part of me that. So we'd move right into parts integration, and then what I would do is, because in many ways I'm into allowing the integration to occur, if a client is in the middle of a nice integration like that and he's had some major shifts, you do want to give it some time to integrate and probably overnight is a good amount of time to do that. Then come back and talk to the client again.

Any questions about the intervention that we just did? Son, question, yes. It's a possible, I might be hallucinating this, so I'd like to actually ask Matthew this. When you were, initially when you talked about your job, it seemed me that it you had a lot of negative feelings about it and even though after the integration you said you wanted to move on tad said tell me about your job and you said well i've been learning a lot it's got me where i wanted to go and there were a lot of positive statements and then you also said and it's time to move on do you feel different more positive more positive about your job even though you're ready to move on? I feel more positive about where I'm going.

Which is a contextual issue. So what happens is he has this tightly bound context. Now he's more positive about where he's going, so he has more context. Yeah, what happened in it was literally when we started integrating the parts all of a sudden my job was in the center and my career was out here so it was like a literally in visual a stepping stone and there's parts in there which I would never want to do again but I want to fix them up and align them now so that they don't come up in the future. And I would say that having the additional context for Matthew allows him then to have a different vision of the job itself right now.

Right? Paula? So I was just going to say, so now that he's less focused on it, it doesn't seem as negative as it was before because all the negative stuff is less important now that it's in the larger context. My guess is that there were some negative emotions, too, that disappeared. If there weren't, we probably would go back and do some timeline therapy with those, too, if this were a personal breakthrough session.

So even if we did this as a values integration and a parts integration at that point, if there were still negative emotions about the job, in order so that his career would be more fulfilling when he gets to the next stepping stone, we probably would want to take out those negative emotions that were related to that. Yeah, one thing on that is my second highest value was not being rejected, okay? And that's really cross-contextual. And I think, for me, it goes to more abandonment and betrayal, which is a very deep issue for me. So that's not gone as such.

And him having said that, we would work on those issues right in the next intervention with timeline therapy. It's interesting that timeline therapy is coming up next, so you'll have the opportunity to work on that. Maybe we'll talk to you again in the next... Other questions? In relationships, are you to look at relationships with all people, or can you look at it with an individual or type of people?

Generally, when working on relationship issues, the clients that I've had are working on getting a primary relationship with someone else. Again, that issue of context is that, of course, probably in working out relationship issues with a single other person, we're going to also probably work out relationship issues with all people. So contextually, again, we're the same issue of context with Matthew. The difference between job and career is the difference between a relationship between one or two people versus your relationships with everybody. So probably that will change the whole thing.

Okay, thank you. So as you expand the context of what it is that you're working on, it's possible that other issues could clear up. So you could do a single relationship intervention and have changes occur in other things that other people, or in your relationships with other people. Obviously, for example, handling anger that comes up in a single two-person relationship, if you handle then all anger in all relationships as you do that, then it's going to clear up your anger in all relationships. Might change your career because we are in relationship and career.

And I think that's a totally acceptable change for an individual, even though it does go out quite a bit out of the context that the client came in with. This is the end of Tape 27, Side A.