# Making Submods Work, Compulsion Blowout, Learning State, Allergy Model, Illness

The compulsion blowout I've used three times in my NLP career. I want you to know that it's worked every time, and it's a very, very intense for the client and for the master practitioner technique. It is really intense. But for some compulsions like anorexia and bulimia, it's a really good intervention. By the way, anorexia is life-threatening.

Here's a disclaimer. Anorexia is life-threatening, and you may want, if you're going to work with anorexia, you may want to have a doctor refer the client to you because it is a life-threatening disease. Okay, what is anorexia? Anorexia is a what? It's actually a revulsion.

Anorexia is a revulsion. It's a revulsion about food. And bulimia is what? A compulsion plus a revulsion. So bulimia's got two parts.

It's a compulsion and a revulsion. And so if you're going to do a compulsion blowout for bulimia, you've got to do both of them. Okay, so bulimia is a compulsion plus a revulsion. Anorexia is just a revulsion. Let me see.

I had a bulimic client for whom timeline therapy was sufficient. But I've had several other clients for whom it wasn't sufficient. And I also used a compulsion blowout once for a guy who was smoking. We were working on smoking. I want you to know that each time I used it, it worked.

The thing about the compulsion blowout is that, let's see how to put it, once you blow this thing out, there's no way back. So once you blow it out and you go over a threshold, then there's no way back. I'm actually not going to demonstrate it because it's a very uncomfortable technique for the client and for myself, but I think you guys ought to know it. Because it's one of the ways, it's like a sledgehammer. It's like using a sledgehammer.

So it's a real decent intervention. It's a fun intervention, but it's a tough one. And one of the things is once you start, you must complete it. If you, if you start, if you notice, notice if you start ratcheting the client up, like what would happen if those of you who are afraid of spiders, if we'd taken you up and left you right there with your feelings the most in your body, it wouldn't have worked. So you've either got to get the client to go over threshold as in the distance one, number three, and, or the client's got to go over the threshold in terms of size, in terms of one on slide number 103.

So the client's got to go over threshold when you do this process, which means that you need to talk to them before you do the compulsion blowout, and you need to say to them, look, this is a very hard process. You may want to stop in the middle, and if we begin it, my agreement with you is that we need to complete it. My agreement with you is that we need to complete it. So if you begin the compulsion blowout, you really have to complete it. You really must complete the compulsion blowout.

If you don't complete the compulsion blowout, you leave the client more compulsed than they were, and that wouldn't be good. Okay? So like a bulimic would be more bulimic. An anorexic would be more anorexic. That would not be good.

So you really must finish it. I would recommend doing timeline therapy first. Like I said, I've done this, I think, three or four times total. It's a hard technique. When you finish, the client's got to have a positive representation of what they will do without the problem.

So think about this for a minute. A client with bulimia spends a lot of time doing that during the day. And a lot of clients who have, for example, anorexia spends a lot of time doing food things all day. A client without a compulsion or a revulsion may end up feeling empty with nothing to do with their life. So you need to give them something else to do with it.

And it is possible that someone could become suicidal after you blew out the compulsion or revulsion. So you've got to be real careful about giving them a future pace, something to do. And that's all in these notes here. Okay, let's look. Let's look and see what we would do then.

There's two parts to the process. First of all, you want to elicit a description of the thing compulsed about. So you're going to ask them, what are you compulsed about? And you want to elicit a description of something similar but not compulsed about. So for example, someone who's compulsed about pistachios might not be compulsed about peanuts.

So I have to eat pistachios all the time, not compulsed about peanuts. Someone who's compulsed about ice cream might not be compulsed about yogurt, especially unsweetened yogurt. It looks the same, but it don't taste the same. So you're going to get the submodality differences and test the differences for drivers. Walsh Art 13, same color, same, but associated to associated centers.

You're going to test the drivers and find out if the drivers are, what, infinite in extent and analog, or if they're analog but not infinite. So, for example, if size, or any other infinite driver, or it could be distance, which is not an infinite driver. So if it's size, you can go, whew, that's great. I'm really pleased. And what you're going to do is you're going to take the picture and blow it up, just like we did the spider thing.

You're going to blow it up beyond the size of the known universe. Initially, the feeling of compulsion will increase. At some point, it will pop out. That's an easy one for the client, usually. The second one's tougher.

And if it's distance, you need to use the ratchet method, like a car jack. And you're going to do it just the same exact way that we did motivation just a few minutes ago. Only this time, you're going to pump it up. And I would say, hand especially you can get your hand get the picture anchored to your hand and move your hand from outward to inward bringing the hand into the client's face clear the screen bring it in clear the screen bring it in what's going to happen is it's going to do the same thing as slide 103 number three it's going to pump up pump up pump up pump pump like a car jack and at some point if you if you jack the car up enough it it'll fall over, right? Well, that's what happens with the ratchet method, and they'll go over the top.

Then steps eight, nine, and ten are the same for both. You wait until the client settles down about five minutes. Test by having them make a picture. Theoretically, there should be no compulsion. If there is still a compulsion, do it again.

I've never had to do it again, But if there is still a compulsion, you may do it again. Number ten, you want to swish, you want to have the old picture swished up into a new picture. What's the new picture? The new picture is, what are you going to do instead? What are you going to do instead?

So, this is why it makes me very confident when a client comes to me and says, can you work with this? I can feel confident that we can handle whatever the client's got. It may take some time to get to this point of me doing a compulsion blowout, but if I do timeline therapy, for example, for anorexia or bulimia, and that doesn't necessarily work in the first week or two, then I may be tempted to go to the compulsion blowout and do that. So that's the process of how to do a compulsion blowout. Like I said, we're not going to do it in class, but you may run into a client that you want to do it with, so we'll let you use it as necessary.

I want to know if you can recommend things that are okay to do instead, things that are safe to suggest. Like what? That they plug it in with. Once their compulsion is gone. No, you ask them.

You ask the client. You say to the client, like, what would you like to do instead? And they'll just name something. Sure. A client will say, oh, well, I'd like to, like, work out.

I'd like to have more time to work out. Or a client would say, oh, I'd like to read books. I mean, especially in the case of anorexia or bulimia, the client would say, well, I'd like to read books, or I'd like to go work out, or I'd like to do some running. So then they won't become compulsive at working out because the compulsion's gone, right? The truth is that.

It would seem to me, so a couple things about that. Yeah. One of the things is if you use timeline therapy, then you're going to take a detailed personal history anyway. Right. And you're going to get at the underlying cause of the compulsion, and I would recommend doing timeline therapy before you do this anyway.

Okay. Okay, I wouldn't just do a compulsion blowout. Me, personally, I would not do a compulsion blowout without having done timeline therapy with a detailed personal history and all of that first. Yeah, so I would do that. And my guess is, so what you're talking about, what you're talking about is transference of symptoms, which is a major issue in Ericksonian hypnosis.

And if you read any of Erickson's work, what happens is if you don't adequately handle the underlying cause, the symptom can break out somewhere else. And as you said, a client could become compulsive about working out, for sure. That is absolutely a possibility. So, timeline therapy first. Handle the underlying root cause.

And we'll talk about that when we get to timeline therapy. If you're listening to these tapes, you probably will want to make sure you get the timeline therapy master practitioner tape set and make sure that, because there is some more about interventions about compulsions in that tape set. But make sure you get the underlying cause. Then if they come back and they still have the compulsion, then you would do the compulsion blowout knowing that you'd already taken care of the root cause of that. That's what's going to handle that issue.

I have two questions. The first one would be, you say that this is hard. Why is it hard on the practitioner? Because as they become more and more compulsed, it can be very uncomfortable. Like, eating one chocolate's great, right?

And eating two chocolates is great. And eating three chocolates is maybe not quite as great as two, but eating four chocolates is quite a lot. And eating, how about 10 chocolates is, and then how about a box of chocolates? Then how about five boxes of chocolates? Then how about 20 boxes of chocolates?

Then how about 300, okay. My son was turning her So for the client in the middle of that, it can be quite uncomfortable. And I've had clients actually beg me to stop, and I reminded them, I said, you know, we really have to get you over the top on this because we agreed we were going to, and it won't be appropriate to leave you there. So you've got to really stick with them. Second part of the question, have you used this for drug and or alcohol addictions?

Personally, I don't work with clients who have drug and alcohol addictions, but we have drug and addictions counselors who have used the compulsion blowout for drug and addictions, both alcohol and cocaine and marijuana and so forth. So, yeah, I think all of these are very important in the arsenal of interventions that you would use for anything, and definitely in terms of compulsions, they're very valuable. You're going to have to decide, you're going to have to decide yourself whether an appropriate intervention is appropriate. If you want an intervention that's less invasive, because this is a real invasive intervention, I mean, the clients I've taken with, it's very uncomfortable to go over the threshold. Neurological drivers that we're about to get to, which is another submodality distinction, is also useful in taking out compulsions.

And that's much less intrusive and much less invasive and a lot more comfortable for the client. We're going to talk about those next. Other questions? That was part of my question, but the other part was how long a time period would this take to do? It takes as long as it takes.

And usually no more than a half an hour. I think the one client that was the most uncomfortable for me was a guy that I did with cigarettes. And he was sweating. It took him about a half an hour to blow it out. But he was sweating because he got into it and he hated it, so he really didn't like it.

So it got kind of funky. Okay, and is this similar to what I've seen where they actually make them smoke the cigarettes all through their mouth, like dozens of them? Well, that's aversion therapy. It could take a person over a threshold. We're actually not doing the physical part.

We're just handling the mental part. But it certainly could take a person over a threshold. There's also shocking people with electric shocks. A shick, I think, used to do that to make them stop smoking. It's behavioral modification.

This is just another method, right? Okay. So we're not going to do this as an exercise, but you have it available in your arsenal. I think it's an important tool in case you need it. Any questions about compulsion blowout?

Good. One more advanced technique, and then we need to move on to some of the stuff that we've been working on and developing here in our little branch of NLP. Oh, here's the learning state. We covered this the first day, page 4-3. Just take a look at page 4-3 so you know where it is.

Those of you who are doing education, absolutely copy this page. Use it. I'm happy to have you use it. It's great. Use it any time you want.

Make a copy of it, hand it out for students, et cetera. And I actually have one. One of our graduates went around all the schools in Honolulu and was doing in-service stuff with teachers just to get them to use it. Okay, let's look at number four, page four. Some of you actually saw me do this intervention two or three Master Practitioner trainings ago with Lani Kai.

She's a nine-year-old who wanted a puppy. And so we did timeline therapy for any negative emotions about dogs, because her thing was that she started sneezing any time she got near an animal. And she so desperately wanted to have a little dog for Christmas, so she came in. And here's the process. It's really, really simple.

And again, remember, with advanced submodalities, we're actually looking at something that the client's allergic to, which is step number one, something similar the client's not allergic to, which is step number two. Does that look like exactly the same way what we did with compulsion blowout? Yeah? Again, we're doing contrastive analysis, and much of the advanced submodality work is simply contrasting and comparing two sets of submodalities when we switch one over to the other. So we're going to find the similar thing not allergic to.

What I used with Lani Kai was her pet teddy bear, her teddy bear, which was furry, but it wasn't alive, was it? Her little teddy bear. So her teddy bear had fur, but wasn't a dog, and she wasn't allergic to it. So we anchored her, and I actually asked her to imagine rubbing her nose in her teddy bear and feeling really good about it, and we anchored that. So we've got a dog that she wanted, step number one.

We've got the submodalities of that. We found something similar, not allergic to, and we got that and anchored that, step number three. Now what the client does is they visualize a large plate. They're in a room, and they visualize a large plate of plexiglass between them and, in this case, between her and the dog. And the dog is on the other side of the plexiglass.

Okay? Then we have her, while we're holding the anchor now, she's imagining the dog, she's imagining the plexiglass. While we're holding the anchor, we have her bring down the plexiglass all the way down and then have her hug the dog and play with the dog and all that in her mind while we're still holding the anchor of the thing it was similar but not allergic to. And what happened is her allergy disappeared. Her sneezing allergy.

This is very, very useful for sneezing allergies. A couple of caveats. Let me give you some caveats. First of all, an allergy is a phobia of the immune system. So what happens is the immune system becomes phobic.

For adult clients, when you do this work, you can tell them. Kids don't really care, but aren't particularly interested in the theory, but some adults are going to want to know. So an allergen says to the immune system, hey, you're going to die if this gets into the body, and so the immune system starts producing large amounts of histamine to try to drive out the allergen. And then sometimes clients, depending on the intensity of the allergen, can go into shock. So one thing you want to be careful of when you're using the allergy technique is it's probably not appropriate to use it, or let's put it this way, if you are going to use it on something to which the client has the possibility of going into anaphylactic shock, I don't know if you know what that is, but the throat actually swells up, constricting the airways, and there's so much, the swelling of the breathing area swells up, constricting the airways in the throat, and the client can't actually breathe.

What will have to happen is probably, I don't know if I'm up to date on this, but probably injections of Benadryl would be indicated or something like that that will cause that to go down. Anaphylactic shock is quite dangerous, and probably if the person could have anaphylactic shock from an allergen like this, they ought to have their little bee sting kits. That's what bee sting kits have. There's a bee sting kit you can have present in case that happens, or you may want to have a medical doctor present. So the theory is that an allergen is a phobia of the immune system where the immune system becomes phobic.

And one of the things I say to adults when I'm doing this, like I did work with one client for cats, and one of the things you say to the adult is you say, look, your immune system thinks that when the allergen from the cat gets in there, you're going to die, but people touch cats every day and they don't die. So the difference is that your immune system thinks that if you touch the cat or if the cat, with dander or whatever it is, gets into your immune system that you're going to die, so what you're going to do is you're going to tell them that that's not going to happen. And you tell the unconscious mind that you can be comfortable, you can be safe. If other people can touch cats and be healthy, so can you. So you're going to talk to them a little bit about that.

This technique, I've not used this technique for food allergies. I've usually used timeline therapy. but this is a very effective technique for sneezing allergies. It's the sneezes. It's very effective for handling any allergen with regards to sneezing. I would also recommend, personally, I would do timeline therapy beforehand.

When I worked with Lani Kai, the significant emotional event that caused, or that she felt caused her allergy was that some altercation with the dog when she was younger. So there was fear there. That's what caused the immune system to be phobic of the dog for her. We got rid of that, and then we did this process too, and it totally cemented it in. And then step number six here on page 4-4 is you will definitely want to future pace, test and future pace.

So at the end, you definitely want to imagine, I had her imagine playing with the dog, holding the dog. And she actually went to the dog place. Isn't that what they call it, the dog place? And got the puppy and brought him home. In her mind now.

Got the puppy, brought the puppy home, played with the puppy, and was totally comfortable. Okay, so that's the process for the allergy model. Questions? With allergies regarding molds, hay fever, things like that, we do timeline first and forget this because how are you going to elicit some modalities on pollen? No, no, no, no, no, no.

Yeah, yeah, yeah. For sneezes, absolutely. Absolutely. For pollen, you don't have, so you're going to have to find something similar. So have you ever gone up to a tree and sniffed a tree?

Or if they know that it's ragweed, have you ever walked up to a flower that you smelled and you didn't sneeze? So it could be, because ragweed's a flower, it could be, what, roses or something they like, like, I don't know, I was thinking, you know, carnations don't have any smell, but maybe it would be a carnation even. In my area, it's like the day after they cut the grass. Okay, okay, cool. Which kicks up, supposedly, the pollen that's falling out of the trees.

Right, so the day after they cut the grass. So what is a similar thing that, so maybe it's the wind, or maybe it's the dust in the air. Supposedly airborne. So maybe it's the wind. Something else that the client could do.

But it's a little tougher. You can use it for this. It's a little tougher to get the exact submodality distinctions because or to get the exact submodalities because if the client doesn't really have a clear picture of something close, then you may have a problem with that. Right? I would say always with this, do timeline therapy first because there's going to be probably a significant emotional event.

There's going to be a significant emotional event first. But this is very effective. Very effective. All the clients I've done this with, it worked. In fact, I knew somebody who actually came out of one of our master practitioner trainings and I didn't follow up, but she was going to go back and open up an allergy clinic simply using this process and timeline therapy.

Now, think about how many people have allergies in the world. And if you could get some significant result, I mean, even allergies to pets and so forth, what a great boon that would be. Other questions? Can you just explain, number four, the plexiglass and what you do there again? Have them visual.

They're in the same room with the dog, as an example. And between them and the dog is a big piece of plexiglass. So the big piece of plexiglass goes from the ceiling to the floor and the entire width of the room. And the dog is on the other side. They're on this side.

And then the dog's on the other side. They're on this side. And you fire the resource anchor. You've got the resource anchor held. You're going to fire the resource anchor.

And while the plexiglass is coming down, the resource anchor is held. And you hold that resource anchor, making sure that they're... So essentially you're bringing it all the way down, still holding the resource anchor, then they walk over and play with the dog, et cetera, and then you feed your patient. Other questions? Yes.

He had brought up mold, and I really didn't understand how you could deal with mold. You had said using timeline, there's usually an underlying cause for an allergy where they would develop a phobia, their body would develop a phobia to a substance. Mold is not something that you can generally see. It's in some foods in the air and different things. It's kind of vague to me, and I was wondering how you could deal with that specific kind of allergy.

Food allergies generally have, actually all allergies generally have a significant emotional event prior to the first onset of symptoms. And oftentimes it's diagnosed as an allergy to molds, and it very well may be, but it's usually associated with some sort of food or something like that. It could be a smell. If you can get the client to find out the first event, then you'll definitely be able to, you'll go a long way toward getting rid of the problems that created that. You're going to have to work with the client.

I mean, we don't have any specifics here, but my experience in working with clients in this regard is that if you can get the client aware of when that first event happened, then they can, here's the thing, cause and effect, right? If the client can choose or can get their process and the creation of it, they can un-choose it. So if they can get the cause and effect of it, that is how they created it, they can also then un-choose, they can un-choose to have it, which will then free them up from having it. So, I can't, unless we have something specific, I will tell you that I could probably find it with a client. And that's because I believe I can find it and because I've always been able to find it.

Even the thing with molds, et cetera, my feeling is there's going to be something that's happened one to three years prior that caused the client to in some way be thinking of or in some way some sort of reaction to something external that then linked the two and caused the immune system to become phobic. I don't know what that would be in advance, but if we go along with some of the theories of timeline therapy, then probably the event would be one to three years prior to the first onset of symptoms. It could be more recently than that. It could be right at the same time as the first onset of symptoms, but it could be as far back as one to three years prior to the first onset. With regards to mold, the client also probably would have, you see, if you could get a hold of the strategy, the client probably would have a strategy for doing it.

Environmental illness is one of those things that is sort of nondescript and kind of fun to work with, and I've worked with a number of people with that. And I had one client who was allergic to mold. If she walked down the street and the bus blew fumes in her face, she'd have to go home and sleep, et cetera, et cetera. You know what environmental illness is, right? And so when I first met her, she came in and she was wearing a mask on her face.

And I said, how's it going? And she went, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. No, just kidding. That's a joke. She's wearing one of those masks on her face.

And she was one of the clients that really had no idea. But what I got from her was, how do you know it's time to do this? Is there ever a time when a bus blows fumes in your face and you don't react? Et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So I did logical levels of therapy with her.

And I also did timeline therapy and got rid of every negative emotion that she had in her past and any limiting decisions about her health. And do you know that, and she would never, she said, she told me when she left, she said, I'll never get on an airplane. I can't stand the diesel fuel, et cetera. And do you know that within three months she came and took one of our trainings? No, really.

She actually flew over here to Hawaii and took one of our HUNA trainings. So, and she came in and she goes, hi, and I didn't recognize her without the mask, you know. Just kidding. Okay. You'll have to excuse me.

I've got the shakes since you started talking about that. But I used to walk around with a mask. Really? Cool. And I've got to the point where I can tolerate things without the symptoms being too bad.

But if you're allergic to all foods and all man-made chemicals, could it all have come from one significant event? Because I'd like to get rid of it. Yeah, yeah. So would you remind me during timeline therapy? Because I'd like to do that.

Yeah. We'll do something on that. That'd be cool. Okay, so here's the deal. Here's the deal.

Okay? The way a phobia develops, oftentimes, and we're just talking about allergies here, right? But the way a phobia, and that's the same thing, environmental illnesses is sort of allergy, sort of, like, related. The way a phobia develops, like, take the way agoraphobia develops. I don't know if you're familiar with agoraphobia.

They're afraid of going out of the house. But it oftentimes begins with a single panic attack. It often begins with a single panic. And then what happens is the client generalizes it. And so what happens is then the immune system and the body generalize the thing to other things.

So is it possible that it could come from one? Yes, absolutely. My experience is it's often very, very simple to get rid of. So the only thing, if you're sitting there shaking, the only thing I would say is, how long have you had this? Well, I was diagnosed eight years ago.

Right, so could your unconscious mind allow you to be comfortable for about four or five more days until we get to the timeline therapy segment when we can handle it? Yeah. Okay. Yeah, so it could be one event, and the way it happens is it's just people generalize. But what the neat thing about that is is it makes it very easy to get rid of because you find the one event and then you're done.

And you may have to do the plexiglass thing and all that too, but we'll, you know, we'll see. Yes. Don't you often find with situations like allergies and other similar things that there's a secondary gain that is in all of this? Especially in agoraphobia and in a number of other cases, there could be secondary gain, and we hopefully can pick that up in the questioning in the detailed personal history. But there could very well be secondary gain.

So does that go away when you do the timeline therapy? No, you have to handle the secondary gain, and that's a secondary consideration. I wanted to know. Yeah, I mean, you have to handle the secondary gain. So here's what secondary gain means.

Oftentimes, the client with pretty extensive allergies, et cetera, or environmental illnesses or phobia will have worked up a tremendous support system for themselves. And so you need to, first of all, talk to the people in the support system and assist them in transitioning from supporting the client when they're sick to supporting the client when they're well. Oh, well, if you're talking about people that are on disability, then that's another issue. The question was, how about the people in the state who are receiving money for being on disability? That's a whole other issue.

Certainly, people who receive money for their problems will often not get rid of their problems. And if you're working in the state system, my hat's off to you. Otherwise, I wouldn't work with a client unless I was clear that they were willing to give up their problem. But that's a whole other issue of finding out what the gain is for keeping it and the gain is for not having it. And you've got to give them some other kind of gain instead.

Okay. This is the end of tape 14, side A.