# Strategy Design

You guys have done the exercise. Everyone here just about has done a chain installation. So we're going to move on to page 8.5 because we want to talk about installing or changing strategies. And as I mentioned before in the practitioner tape set as well as in the accelerated practitioner training, there's not a lot of difference between a strategy installation and a chain design and installation. There are just a few more considerations that we're going to have, and we're working also with different representational systems.

So we're working with different rep systems to see how that works. So let's look at page 8.5 and look at what some of the structural well-forminous conditions for strategies are. Usually there's a well-defined representation of the outcome. We're on page 8.5 under structural well-forminous conditions. That all, there are at least three of the major, that would be visual, auditory, and kinesthetic, are used.

That there's at least three points in a loop, and every loop includes an exit point, and that the client goes external after a certain number of steps or a certain amount of time, and it uses the least number of steps to get the outcome, that there's a logical sequence, and that it has the necessary internal and external modalities to get the desired outcome. Preserves positive byproducts, eliminates negative consequences, follows the totem model, and minimizes bad feelings. There are some functional well-forminous conditions, which is that there's a trigger that starts the process, the operations to alter the present state to bring it closer to desired state, a test which compares the present criteria, and a decision point that determines the next step. So if we look at page 8.6, there are a number of different ways to install or to change strategies. One is rehearsal, another is reframing, another is metaphor.

My preference is to do anchoring. When we rehearse, we simply have the client put their eyes in a certain place and do that, And notice that after a while the strategy is installed. But I prefer to do that and to have the anchoring going on at the same time. You could use metaphor. And there are some examples of state installation and metaphor where you could talk about, I mean to kids for example, you talk about a little prince who made pictures in his head and as're telling the kids a story, you can actually move your eyes up to visual, say, visual recall or visual construct, and that he compared the pictures, the pictures that he had, moving the eyes back and forth across the top, and that after a while, he could get a good feeling for it, moving the eyes down to kinesthetic.

So you can do installation by simply telling metaphors. It's especially useful with kids if you, or with groups of kids, too, if you want to. So when you're designing a strategy, you want to maintain the function and intervene, too, before the strategy causes a problem. So what you're going to hear me do when I do this demonstration, I hope, is we're going to have to find out where the problem in the strategy is and what needs to happen to correct that. So it says here, intervene before the strategy goes haywire.

That's sort of a loose description of what happens. But at some point, there's a problem part of the strategy. So let me give you an example. I worked with a woman once that had a VK decision-making strategy. And her presenting problem was that she was buying too much stuff at the stores.

In fact, she'd walk in, see something she wanted, got a feeling for it, bought it, and went home with it. And then when she ran her reassurance strategy, she realized that 75% of the stuff she bought, she had to return. So she was like one of the return queens of Honolulu, where she would return stuff to the store, and the store go, oh here she comes again. But fortunately she managed to solve that problem because she did go to a store that had an unquestioning return policy. So you could return anything you wanted to with no questions asked.

So essentially what we did was simply separate her strategy out. We got the visual in one place, anchored to kinesthetic in another place. And then we put in a third part where she rehearsed and imagined herself saying, do I really need this? Put that in the middle, anchored it back in, chained it together, and she went into the store by her own account. Her buying dropped to 25%.

Well, obviously it would in the first week. So she was real happy with the intervention. In the design principles, it says also to calibrate and to reframe or use submodalities on unpleasant feelings or unpleasant voices. To get rid of unnecessary steps, make sure the criteria are accessed sequentially and not simultaneously, and to make the least amount of change to get the results you want. These are all things that are important.

When you redesign a strategy, I think you want to make up what you could work. You may check your own strategy. But you also, in addition to the points here, you want to ask the client and calibrate the client as to what would work best. As you analyze what the client is doing with his or her strategy, you want to look at what they're doing and notice if it makes sense that that strategy would work in that context, and then what other pieces need to be added there that are going to solve the problem. So that's essentially what we're going to be doing in this process of strategy installation.

If there is a negative state that the client ends up getting into, or if the client actually ends up with a continuing amount of negative kinesthetic, you may want to use timeline therapy to get rid of that negative kinesthetic. So if the strategy becomes part of the client's, part of an ongoing negative emotion that the client has, you probably would want to use timeline therapy somewhere along the way, either before or after installing a strategy. Okay, so here's what we're going to do, essentially, in this demonstration, is we're going to elicit all the steps of the strategy. So we're actually going to ask the client to slow it down and anchor them. So assuming a strategy, and we're looking at slide number 99, and assuming the client has a strategy of visual construct auditory tonal kinesthetic but let's say for some reason the client has decided so here's this is an example by the way of a motivation strategy or a decision making strategy for example and let's say that this was a client makes a picture, says something to yourself like, wow, and then gets a feeling.

That would be a reasonably interesting motivation strategy, right? But felt that they were too, like, flying off the handle at new projects. They might have wanted just a little something to tone themselves down or to make them a little more stable in terms of running off and doing all kinds of new projects, then we might add an auditory digital, like, is this really something I want to do? Then you'd actually have the client rehearse that and anchor it, and then you would chain the steps, one, the VC, down at the bottom here, VC, auditory tonal, auditory digital, and kinesthetic. So that's really how we would do the installation of the strategy.

Any questions about that? So essentially that's what we're about to see, I hope, depending on the client that we work with here. So what really makes the change is actually by doing the chain. I heard on your tapes two or three years ago, because I have a similar buying strategy. I see it, I love it, I buy it.

So I didn't do any chaining, but I now do ask myself, do I really need this? That was probably rehearsal then. Except I still go, yes, and I buy it. So even though I ask. Wait, wait, wait.

I'll bet you put the auditory, because when you just ran that and I watched you, I'll bet you put the auditory digital in after the kinesthetic. Oh, yeah. Did you? Well, I didn't put it anywhere. I just, I feel it and then I go, do I really need it?

Okay, great. Well, the auditory digital needs to go in before the kinesthetic. But I see it and I love it. Yeah. Then what you're going to do is you're going to separate it, put the AD in before the kinesthetic.

How do you do that? How do you do that? I mean, how do you do that? Thanks for asking. Because you have to anchor it.

Just like that. Just like that. Just imagine the auditory tonal, just on slide number 99, imagine the auditory tonal part isn't there. So what you've got is you've got a visual, external, and kinesthetic. Oh, gotcha.

Okay, yes. Okay? So all we would do is anchor the visual, external, and kinesthetic. Okay. Then we would anchor the auditory digital.

Do I really need that? And we would chain the three of them together. And you'd end up with visual, external, auditory digital, kinesthetic. And so the reason it hasn't been working is because I didn't really chain anything. I was just in my head trying to do it in the store.

So I would see something and immediately love it. Right. So there was no time. Right. Because nothing was chained in.

Right. Right. You ready? Let's go up and do this. Give her a hand.

She was definitely angling for this. Okay, so let's see. So your strategy, we'll just save a little time here, is your decision-making strategy for buying is what? I see it, I like it, I buy it. Now, I might check the price, because yesterday we came in with some AD stuff, but I think it's only because I'll always look at the price, but the truth is it doesn't matter.

I'll still buy it. I mean... When do you check the price? After you love it or before you love it? After I love it.

This is a great shopper. This is a great shopper. Guess what we've got here, though? We just got the AD in the wrong place. Can you see that?

And from what she was describing to me a moment ago, could you all hear that she had the, she's got a very fast VK synesthesia with an AD to try to make sense out of it, but the AD doesn't work because it's not in the right place, right? Okay, son. So let's see if we can really slow that down. Can we ask your unconscious, oh, do you have any anchors here that? Oh, no, they're.

Anchor, she's using anchor off. Thank you very much. Okay. They're done. Okay.

Okay. All right, let's see. So, can you slow, I want to ask your unconscious mind to allow you to slow this way down. Can you remember the last time you walked into a store? Remember the last time you walked into a store and saw something you wanted?

This morning. Yeah, just walked into the store saw something you wanted. Right? Okay. Good.

Now, okay, you can clear the screen. Uh, can you remember the time you walked in the store and saw something you wanted? Just one more time. Walked in the store, saw something you wanted. But I want you to, I want you to run it only, and I don't want you to get the feeling part.

Just run it up to see something you want. That's it. Okay? Okay, just run it right up to that point. The feeling comes in pretty fast.

Yeah, that's right. That's right. Now, what I want you to do next is I want you to come on back for a second. Okay? Now I want you to run the part where you walk into the store and see it, and what I want to do is get the feeling.

So I want you to go run it right up to the point where you get the feeling and stay in the feeling now. There you go. Okay. All right. Let's do it one more time.

What I want you to do is to run it right up to the point where you get the feeling. And of course, if you're listening to the tapes, what I'm doing in between here is I'm anchoring these things. So run it right up to the point, run it right up to the point, and then start with the part where you get the feeling there. There you go. Good.

Okay. Now, this is visual-electronical, something you see, right? Something you see, and then you get an immediate, shall we say, feeling for it, right? All right. And then what I'd like you to do is I'd like you to ask yourself, I'd like you to imagine being in that context, okay?

And what I'd like you to do is I'd like you to ask yourself right now, in fact, imagine being in that context and ask yourself right now, do I really need this? Okay? Great. Let's do it again. Clear the screen.

Okay. Back in the same context and ask yourself, do I really need this? Okay? Okay. Great.

Now, notice that that is also probably the same way she runs the strategy already, isn't it? Because I elicited it in the same order that she already runs it, but if you were watching, you'll notice that I anchored it sequentially in a different order on her knuckles because I'm going to chain them together in the order. I don't know if you were following that. I used her first finger for the first one, and I used her ring finger for the second one, and then I put the auditory digital one in the middle there. Not that it matters, but operationally, it's going to be a little easier for me to be able to do that.

Now, son, what I want you to do is, because I want to slow this way down, and what I want you to do is I'm going to ask you to move your eyes up to here, and then we're going to move your eyes down to here, and then over to here when you do that. So while I fire the anchor, I want you to imagine, or actually recall again, walking into a store. So what are we doing? We're doing rehearsal and anchoring at the same time. So we'll be doing rehearsal and anchoring.

I'm going to hold my finger in a certain place for her to follow my finger so that she's actually following the finger to rehearse the eye patterns while I fire the anchor, and I'll talk you through the different parts of it at the same time. So, Sun, first of all, remember you're walking into a store, and you actually see something you want, so what I'd like you to do is ask yourself, do I really need that? And then get a feeling. Okay? Nice day outside, isn't it?

Let's try that again. So you're walking into a store, right? And you actually see something that you want. And then you actually get a feeling for it. I didn't move my fingers quick enough there because my hands weren't in the right place.

Let's try that again. So clear the screen once again. You're walking into the store, and you're getting a, do I really need that? And the feeling. One more time.

Clear the screen. This is good. It seems like I can't get a feeling. Well, that's what you asked for, wasn't it? Yeah.

No, we'll see what happens. Okay, so you walk in the store, see something you want. Do I really need this? Get a feeling. Great.

Okay. Now, that's a board there, isn't it? That's a piece of 12-inch pine. Okay. Son, sometime in the future, you're going to walk into a store.

Son, sometime in the future, you're going to walk into a store. You're going to see something you want. What's going to happen? Tell me about it. She's right down to A.D., isn't she?

Let me just check that out. Now, in the store, you see something you want, right? Let's see what happens. That's just so weird. I'll ask, do I really need this?

Yes, you will, won't you? And you know what? There will be a lot of times you really will. And you'll get it. Because, I mean, I think it's okay to get stuff, right?

Just not build to cost $165 a month. Well, yeah, do I really need this? No. Right, okay. Excellent, right?

That's great. Yes? I've got one question. When you do that, what if the person really doesn't need anything? Well, then they are the Buddha.

If the person really doesn't need anything, if when we do that the person really doesn't need anything, they are the Buddha. And all they need is the flower to realize they are the sap. Thanks, son. Give her a hand. Good job.

But if I need it, I'll buy it. Yes, absolutely. I'm with you. Absolutely. I had a little trouble with the anchoring and coordinating my hands there.

As you may have noticed on the second pass there, I sort of lost. But we got her reinstalled anyway. Somebody could have the same strategy that she had and it'd still work, right? Oh, yeah, sure. Hey, if it ain't broke, don't fix it.

One of my rules. But for her, she got the K too soon. For her, she got the kinesthetic too soon. So she really didn't know. The AD didn't have any effect on her.

How do you walk into a store and see something you want without getting a feeling? Is there anybody that has a decision-making strategy of visual, auditory, digital kinesthetic? Paula, will you tell her how you do that? Paula's going to tell you now. You don't know you want it until you get a feeling.

But now, Paula does it differently. She's going to tell you how she does it. Because I used to have sons and I installed the AD also. Oh, you did? Oh, wow.

How about somebody that really has one, though? Does anybody really have one? So what do you do now? Well, now I walk in. I see things that I like all the time.

Well, I see things that I like and could possibly want, but I always ask myself, you know, is this what I really want? Do I want this more than other stuff? Do I really need it? The A.D. just kicks in. Yeah.

Does that take the fun out of shopping? Are you having fun? Yes. Paula's having fun. You feel better about what you bought.

Oh, you feel better afterward. Yeah, so you feel better afterward. You don't like that, do you? This doesn't fit your model of the world, I can tell. No, like is different than want.

And I have an extra K on the end, too. Yeah, here's the deal. If it ain't Brooke, don't fix it. Keep shopping the way you do. I'm in favor of that, I think.

However you want to do it. When I go into a shop, I used to spend so much time on the AD. So I went to a lady and I asked her to tell me what colors suit me. So when I go into a shop, I know exactly where to go. And it saves time because I love talking to myself.

That makes sense to me. So that's the submodalities. We got that down. Okay. All right.

Excellent. Excellent. So that's the process of strategy installation. And what did we do? We just did anchoring and rehearsal at the same time.

Okay, so we separated them out. Client, as best they could, separated them out. Wall chart 99, they separated out each one. We anchored each one. And then we went on to put in the one we needed.

And then we ended up with, so you're going to end up, son, with a visual auditory digital kinesthetic strategy. And so what I would do, by the way, if I were seeing son, I'd probably come and talk to her in a week or so and see how that settled in, see how it was going for her, and see if there was any adjustments necessary. But probably that's going to work real well. Okay, I want to point out one other way of changing strategies, or one other way of actually shifting a strategy in a context, and we're going to look at page 423 for that, called access alignment. The first thing you want to do, and by the way, I'm not going to demonstrate this because we already, I just pretty much demonstrated with Sun the similar process.

But here's what you want to do when you're doing this process. And what this is going to do is it's going to allow you to align the client's accessing of certain states. So the first thing you want to do is identify the problem. You want to get in touch with what the context is and find out what the unwanted state is. If the problem is a specific behavior, you need to know what the state is that drives it.

And elicit the front half of the strategy for producing that state from the I accessing cues. I mean, you could eventually end up eliciting the whole state, but you want to elicit the front half of the strategy anyway. You may get the whole strategy, in which case you could write that down. That's fine. You'll want to ask the client for the stimulus, which is when do you do it, and the operation, which is how do you do it.

Okay. Now, the third step is to elicit a counterexample or some kind of a resource state. So it could be the opposite state of the problem, or you could ask the client, what is a good resource to have in this situation? So let me give you an example of what that might be. A client who feels bad about reading.

This is especially useful for a very quick fix. So a client that feels bad about reading, and what you want to do is you want to elicit the state, identify the problem, identify the context, the unwanted state. Client feels bad about reading. And you elicit the front half of the strategy. Like, how do they do that?

So you're going to put them back in the state. Remember the last time when you were reading. Put them back in the state. And then you're going to elicit, like, what would be a good resource to be in when you were reading? And you're going to elicit the front half of that.

You're going to actually elicit that whole strategy from my accessing cues. Like, for example, client wants to be in a happy state. Client wants to be in a happy state when they're reading. So one thing you'd ask them is then, okay, so how do you do happy, and you're going to elicit that strategy. Once you've got those two strategies elicited, you're going to, and here's a hint, if the two strategies are too close to each other, then you should pick a different resource state.

In other words, if you come up with two strategies that are exactly the same, then the new strategy is probably not different enough from the old strategy to make a change. So put a little star next to the, next on number four to hint, if the representational sequence is the same, pick a different resource. And probably, best way to look at it is if the first step is exactly the same, then that may indicate that it may also not be different enough. So you're going to have to be looking to notice that if the strategies have a different step or a different set of representational sequences, a different set of V-A-K-O-G's as they go through the strategy. Okay, so what I'm going to assume, however, is that the resource strategy was sufficiently different from the presenting problem strategy that you're going to proceed to step number five.

So we're going to have the client go into the context and you can ask them, just think about reading, for example, or just think about the problem, and direct them to move their eyes in the sequence of the resource strategy. So, for example, if the client's resource strategy was, let's say the client's negative state was kinesthetic, auditory, digital, visual, and the resource strategy was visual, kinesthetic, auditory, tonal, then what you're going to do is you're actually going to hold your fingers and have them follow your fingers in the same sequence as what the resource strategy was while they're thinking of reading. Okay, so you're essentially going to have them rehearse a new strategy while they're in the context of reading. Does that make sense? You have the unwanted problem.

You have a problem, right? Client has a problem. Are you with me? And it's an unwanted state, and there's some context. It's an unwanted state they get into.

Like for example, when I read I, I feel bad. Cause maybe they had some problems in school or whatever. You're gonna elicit the, you're gonna elicit the strategy for reading. Right? So you're gonna, you're gonna assume that they produce a strategy when reading and elicit it from the eye patterns.

You only need to get the front half, but that's, that's just an aside. You can get the whole strategy if you want. Then you're going to say, what would be a good resource to be in while you're reading? Are you bothered by only getting half the strategy? I'm calibrating.

Okay, get the whole strategy. Get the whole strategy. I'm fine with that. So get the whole strategy. Then find out what's a good resource for them to be in.

Like, for example, clients that like to be happy. So you say, great, how do you do happiness? And elicit that strategy. Okay? Elicit the whole strategy.

Okay? Then, what you want to do is, assuming the two strategies are different enough, and you're going to have to decide that. It's going to be something which you will look at and notice if they're different. Then you're going to have the client think of reading while you trace for their eyes the new strategy. So again, it's rehearsal.

It's rehearsal just like we did with Sun. She's going to follow my fingers while thinking of reading. We're going to install the new strategy while she's reading. Okay? You're going to condition at least three times or until the client's unable to access the problem, and then future pace.

By the way, in step number five, you should notice a significant physiological shift. So you should see a physiological shift in the client when that happens. Okay? I'm not going to demonstrate this because I just, I did a demonstration of that when sun was falling on my fingers and it's essentially the same. So what you're doing is you're taking a good strategy, I mean, if we can say there are good and bad strategies, obviously a strategy which makes a client feel bad is not a good strategy, right?

So you're taking a good strategy and you're installing it in a situation where the client's using a strategy that probably wasn't so good. So if you install a strategy for happiness for them, for example, or feeling good, or something like that, over the other strategy, what happens is, is that they, they get to use the new strategy in the old context. So you're essentially just pulling a strategy across from the new context to the old context. Does everyone get that? Yes.

If a person doesn't have the skills required to read, obviously, there's a difference between confidence and competence. We can always, using NLP, install confidence, but competence is something that may take time for a person to learn something. So if a person has minimal skills for reading and they feel bad about it, then this would improve their feelings about it. It might not improve their competence. However, if their reading was not particularly good because they felt bad about it, they might notice a really big improvement in their willingness to read.

But, for example, someone who wanted to speed read who'd never been taught to speed read probably wouldn't, just because of this strategy, learn how to speed read. They probably would have to take a speed reading course, but they might be more apt to take it now than they would have before. Yeah? Yes? How would you handle reading makes me tired?

Well, I'd like to know why. One of the things I do personally is, are you talking about yourself? Yeah. Well, I'd like to know why, and my guess is there's probably some negative kinesthetics involved for you. Were there negative kinesthetics involved for you in learning how to read or in school?

Do you remember at all? I mean, this actually might be a good intervention for that. And one of the things I might do is I might take a look at timeline therapy for taking out whatever negative emotions the client has. To me, tiredness under any situation is a result of conflicts at the unconscious level, whether the conflicts are negative emotions or parts conflicts. So a client who says that makes me tired, whatever it is, is probably dealing with those kind of conflicts, either holding down the negative emotions or whatever.

So there's three different ways one could proceed. And this, by the way, is the same for environmental issues, environmental illness, for example. And that is that there's oftentimes conflicts. So look for parts integration. Look at the strategy.

And look at timeline therapy to take out the negative emotions. So if there's any negative emotions, or there could be a limiting decision. There could be a limiting decision in there. There could be negative emotions associated that are making the client tired, or there could be a limiting decision called reading makes me tired. So if you'll remind me, maybe we could take a look at that in our timeline therapy segment.

Okay, so that's our tour de force of strategies, if there are no further questions. And what I'd like to do is, if we could, is to look at submodalities. This is the end of tape 13, side A.