# Deductive, Presupp, Quantum Linguistics

So here's the plan. We're about to do an exercise. Okay, directionalized language also relies on, perhaps a little bit on your understanding of the hierarchy of ideas. I'm going to assume you've already got this for purposes of this particular exercise, but there are some things you can ask yourself to chunk up if you want to assist yourself in the process of moving toward greater abstraction. You probably had this in your practitioner training.

You can ask yourself to chunk up or to move more toward the abstract. You can ask yourself, what is this an example of or for what purpose or what is your intention? In chunking down, you can ask yourself, what or whom specifically or what are examples of this? Or actually, any metamodel question will also chunk you down. We're going to come back to this when we move into negotiation.

We're going to have some negotiation thinking after a bit. But let's go back first of all and look at page two, nine, because we're about to do an exercise. So I want to explain the process, if I may. Then I'd like to give you some examples. Okay, we're looking at page 2, 9.

And what we're about to do is an exercise based on presuppositions. So, the process is going to go like this. You're going to chunk up, chunk up to find the most basic presupposition. And one of the questions you might want to ask the client, by the way, it might be useful when we do this, we're going to do this in groups of three. I'll talk about that in a moment.

But it might be useful to ask the client, how is this a problem now? That's a very important question to quantum linguistics. We'll be asking that question a number of times in a number of different ways. How is this a problem now? Then you want to, step number two on page 29, you want to determine which of the basic presuppositions will have the greatest effect on the problem.

So what I want to recommend is when the client gives you their problem, you write it down. So you are going to write down with your client the problem almost as closely as possible word for word. And then you're going to get together with the observer or the other person in your group. So groups of three. So it'll be three groups of three.

And in this case, we'll have one group of four. And we'll have groups of three. And you get together the observer and the practitioner, master practitioner. We'll get together with the client. Client will give them a presenting problem.

Then you'll find out the most basic presuppositions. You may have to chunk up, so you can ask the client, you can chunk up asking the client. And one of the things to ask is, how is this a problem now? Which is an important question from the point of view of quantum linguistics. Step number two is you're going to determine which ones have the greatest effect on the problems, and you're going to structure the response as a question and presuppose the solution in the question.

So you're going to look for, you're going to do all the presuppositions in the sentence. You're going to discover, look and see, and pay attention to, see right under number one, it says do all the presuppositions. You're going to discover all the presuppositions in the sentence that the client gives you. So go through them, observer and master practitioner. And then step number three, well, then determine the ones that have the greatest effect on the problem.

And number three, you're going to structure the response as a question and presuppose the solution in the question. How? How, you might ask. By doing a mind read on what solution will work and asking a question that presupposes it. For example, presenting problem is, husband says I get pissed off at my wife every time I come home and I see all the kids' toys all over the floor.

The process is for you to go out past the point of resolution and look at the ecology and then ask him a question about ecology. So that's a time one, isn't it? Temporal. You say, what are you going to do with all the time when you see the toys and plays? Or, how good will your wife feel when you only get pissed off at the kids?

Or, how will your wife feel when the room's clean? Let's look at the next page. So, each of these is one of the presuppositional categories that we just went over a few minutes ago. So, you can construct a solution for each of the different presuppositions, and let me give you some examples. For the presupposition of existence, you can challenge the client's reality strategy, or you can do an evidence challenge, which is essentially the evidence is challenging the strategy of them knowing they have it.

So the client says, I have anxiety. You can say, when are you sure it's not there? Is this a bit of quantum thinking that we're beginning to talk about? Yes. We're beginning to think in the way that we already talked about a moment ago.

And by the way, if you're in confusion right now, as some of you came up to me on the break and said you were, you're right in the right place. Because I hope you realize by now that you're not going to be able to do this exercise consciously. Did you realize that yet? Good. Some of you did.

Very good. Okay. Number two, presupposition of awareness. You want to pace the presupposition the client gave you plus not plus switch the referential index. Let's see what we get.

Example is, client says, I didn't realize that upset you. The response is, what you didn't realize is that you were communicating your upset. Another possible response is, I didn't realize how upset you were. That also looks at the symmetrical relationship of the upset. Number three, let's say you get a modal operative impossibility.

So, for example, can't. Remember that the word can't means I can do the process if not. Remember that? Remember from your practitioner training. Can't means I can do the process of not.

So client says, I can't stop drinking. Their response is, how can you? How can you not stop drinking? If it's a modal operator of necessity, you're going to chain it to a modal operator of possibility. For example, can, we're also going to look in a little bit at another way of training modal operators.

The response is, so how can you not? Complex equivalence. With a complex equivalence, you're going to take it to the opposite, then paste it to the limit and use a counterexample with a referential index switch. So client says, my wife never has dinner done, that means she doesn't love me. The response is, how much will you have to eat?

So that she knows she loves you. And by the way, that may not make any logical sense, but I want to tell you what it does to the problem. It actually blows out the boundary conditions. Number five. What you do is you switch position, chunk up on the effect, switch referential index, and do a knot on the cause.

My wife doesn't understand me. What is it that you don't understand in yourself that causes you to think that? What is it you don't understand in yourself that causes you to think that? Number six, time. Just take it to the limit and apply it to self.

So switch referential index and apply to self. By the way, since time is a nominalization, you can also use a decision destroyer. We're going to cover that in a bit. Client says, I regret my decision. The response is, when did you decide that?

And before you were regretting it, what were you deciding? Interesting, huh? Adjective adverb, which are often comparative deletions, just use the challenge for comparative deletion from your practitioner, which you remember is the same behavior in a different context. If you get an adjective or adverb presupposition, it's usually going to be a comparative deletion, in which case think of the same behavior in a different context. You may find an or.

You may find an or. If you find an or, if a client says or, then you're going to chunk up to a common intent, which gives you a mind read, which is what, when, or how, plus an exclusive or. So a client says, I can't decide if I should take the trainer's training or go home. The response is, so if you don't do what you want to, how will you learn what you need to learn? Not necessarily.

Client says, should I stay in this relationship or not? It's the same construct. How will you ever be able to relate to anyone if you're not free to do what you want? And finally, the ordinal. What you're going to do is reverse the order and apply one on top of the other.

So if you ever get an ordinal that's a problem, just reverse the order and put one on top of the other. So client says, I need to know why before I change what I do. The response is, so why don't you change? Why would you do it? Okay, those are the examples.

Here's the process. Page 212, very simple. You guys are going to get together, three groups of three, one group of four. Don't try to do this consciously, okay? Don't try to do this consciously.

Here's what's going to happen. The client is going to say something. He's going to give you a problem. You can chunk up on it to find the most basic presuppositions. One of the questions you want to ask is how is this a problem now?

So chunk up on it and get that down and write it down almost as best you can word for word. When you have enough information, send the client away. And then master practitioner and observer work on the solution together. What you will find is the minute you stop trying to figure it out and you just let your unconscious mind come up with solutions and you write down the good ones, that you'll have the best ones. Okay, so this exercise will probably cause you to...

I'm not going to suggest this. Trust your unconscious mind even more than you do. Okay, then structure the response as a question, presuppose the solution in the question, and bring the presuppositions into awareness. Oh, let's talk a little bit about what happens during an exercise. Although in this exercise, the master practitioner and the client are working together, generally in each of our exercises, we're looking at slide number 29, there'll be a client, a master practitioner, and an observer.

The client is, of course, the client. And you know who you are when you're the client. You've got a problem. And when you're the master practitioner, you don't have a problem. Right?

You're just the solution. And the observer, here's the deal. One of the things we've noticed in NLP is that the observer learns by just watching. And the observer learns a lot of stuff about the unconscious relationship that occurs. So in many cases, it's sort of an ebb and flow, and you're to watch that as the observer.

And watch it in what? Peripheral vision, yeah. Have your peripheral vision be extended out over both people and watch that. Every time we give feedback in this training, we're going to use a feedback sandwich. A feedback sandwich usually occurs within five minutes after the time or whatever exercise it was, actually sooner than that if possible.

And the sandwich is what was right, what needs improvement, and overall what was right. The feedback sandwich example that I've used before is a client sensory acuity. You say to the client, gee, your sensory acuity is really great. You picked up the micro muscle movements around the lips and you correctly identified those. However, you missed it when your client fell off the chair breathing heavily.

And so if you simply tune your awareness to the gross muscle movements, you'll probably have a lot more sensory distinctions, which you could make. However, overall, your ability to notice fine distinctions is really excellent. That's a feedback sandwich. All feedback during this training will be given in a feedback sandwich. Okay, so, but in this case, in this case we're working on, in this case we're working on groups of three, but, or it was actually one group of four.

So A will be the client and B and C will work together in this exercise to develop the thing. Okay? Okay. Questions about the exercise? Yes?

Are there particular problems that would be more appropriate than others? No, you can pick any problem you want. One of the things I might suggest, however, is that the problem itself should probably not be the biggest thing you've ever encountered in your life, so that you can have an example of how this works. And you're probably going to want to use this with your clients when you work with your clients. One thing's important, and I want you to consider this.

The solution or the answer that you give, when you give an answer that presupposes you, when you actually ask a question that presupposes a solution, it doesn't have to be logical. One of the things about quantum linguistics is, don't worry about logic. It only has to be plausible, which is a whole different issue. So quantum linguistics is not about logic, it's about, in this case, for this an-, for this particular exercise, it's about plausibility. Are you guys ready?

How many people are confused? Raise your hand. Great. Put your hands down. Thank you.

How many people are too confused to raise your hand? Raise your hand. Good. By the way, you're right in the right track. If you're confused and you're going into this exercise, that's perfect because guess what?

You will not be able to rely on your conscious mind. Sorry, but this was by design for this exercise. You guys are right in the right place? Let's go do it. Do you remember that thing about reaching back?

Remember that thing about reaching back and finding something you didn't know was there? Do you think that was just a metaphor? Okay. Ready, go. If you're going to do this exercise, stop the tape and go ahead and do the exercise.

All right, so how did that last exercise go? How did you like it? How many people noticed that they actually had to trust your unconscious mind to do this? Anybody? Everybody.

Good. Good. And did you notice that lighting up the client's neural networks before you fed back the problem to the client really helped? Yeah? Because what you have to do is you have to present the problem back to the client again and then present the solution.

By the way, can I tell you guys something? This is the toughest exercise we do in the entire training. This is our first day, the end of our first day at the Master Practitioner Training. How do you like it so far? Yeah?

Those of you who haven't been here, remember I said they light the torches at night? We're looking at the torches. Isn't that great? All right, let's take a look at where we're at. So a little more theory about quantum linguistics, and we'll actually see where we can go.

Honestly, you guys did the toughest exercise last night that we have, and the rest of them are easy because they're real sort of formularistic. So let's look and see. And we're looking at slide 31. Let's do a little comparison, if we may, between thinking which probably is, we'll say, old paradigm or an old way of thinking versus the way we're asking you to think, which we'll call the new model. We've accepted cause and effect as a presupposition so far.

In fact, cause and effect has actually been proven at this point by quantum physics. Do you all understand the particle versus a wave study of light? Would you like me to go over that again? Yeah? Okay, so we're looking again at wall chart number seven.

And if we have a source of light here at the top of the chart with an L and we have a couple of dividers in this box which have slits in them. The first line on the top of your chart has one slit, and the second line has two slits. Light behaves like a wave when it comes through here. If you could imagine dropping a stone in a pond of water, right? Light behaves like a wave because we get these dark and light bars on the back wall.

If you could imagine, maybe I'm drawing too many dark and light bars, I don't know. But if you could imagine the waves, actually, when light behaves like a wave, if you could imagine the waves coming off of the first slit, right? The waves actually coming off of the first slit, looking like as if you dropped a pebble there in the first slit. So you have sort of circular waves coming out from the first slit, which I have drawn there. And what happens then is that the waves go through the second slits.

And as the waves interact with each other, see where they're crossing over underneath the second slit? As the waves interact with each other, we get, they cancel each other out. Or they reinforce each other. You know how if you drop a stone in a pond of water, at some point there's going to be waves and at some point there isn't, right? Especially as it hits the shore, they're going to bounce back.

So what we get then is we get bars of light and dark across the back. And the bars of dark are where the light has canceled each other, where the light waves have canceled each other out. And the light is where the light added to each other so it became more intense. Okay? So that's the wave theory.

So this proves that light is a wave. Now here's the second part of the experiment, which was even weirder and further out. They then decided to measure light as a particle, so pick any point on the, pick any point here, pick any point on this chart and measure light, and measure one photon of light. And the weird thing was that let's say they, let's say they measured the one photon of light, let's say they measured it just below the left slit on wall chart number seven. Well what happened was they found the photon there.

Now the weird thing was if they later measured it just below the right slit they found the the photon there, and if they found it just below the upper slit, they found the photon there. And what they found was, anywhere where they measured the photon before it hit the back wall, it was present. One photon. Everywhere where they measured it, from the source of light all the way to the back wall where the bars of light were, just before the back wall, the photon was present there. Which essentially implies that the photon is present down all paths of probability simultaneously.

Until it chooses which bar of light to hit on the back wall. That's really bizarre. Furthermore, it also says that if I stick my measuring device below the second slit on the left, then by measuring it, I will cause the photon to be present there. It also says that. Because if I measured it there, and then I measured it on the second slit on the right, if I measured it partway down on the right on the second slit, if I found the photon everywhere I measured it, even though there was only one photon coming out from this source of light, if I found it everywhere I measured it, then I was causing it to be where I measured it.

That's the implication. So essentially what we're saying is that cause and effect is essentially proven. If I measure it, then I cause it to be there. Now, the old model in terms of time says that the past creates the present and it creates the future. Well, the truth is that, and by the way, this is what makes timeline therapy possible.

The truth is that everything is created in the now. Even when you go back and you do timeline therapy on the past, you know it's now still, right? So everything that you do in the now, everything you do in timeline therapy, you're actually in the now. And you're aware that you're in the now, but you're doing it on the past, which you're aware is a concept. So this notion of quantum linguistics makes timeline therapy possible.

But there's another quantum linguistic study. Think about this for just a minute. This is really bizarre. This is another bizarre study. You know what a quasar is, right?

It's a very bright, bright star. And they go so bright that they burn out very quickly. Now there are quasars that are, let's say, billions of light years away from here, whose light is just arriving on the earth right now, right? You can all conceive of that, right? A quasar, a very bright star, billions of light years away from here, the light is coming to the Earth.

We're looking at the quasar, the light's coming to the Earth, right? Now the star's already burned out. The star's not there anymore, because it burned out. Quasars go poof, and then they burn. Like, you know, on the light bulb, if you hit it, whack a light bulb, and it gets really bright, and then it burns out real quick?

That's like a quasar. Only the quasar's got more light in it than a light bulb. Now, if we measure the light coming from a quasar, and we measure it as though it was a wave, it will behave as a wave. And if we measure the light of a quasar as a particle, it will behave as a particle. Therefore, what we are doing by our measurement is we're going back a billion years and we're telling the light how to behave.

And the light behaves that way. This is also what makes timeline therapy possible. It also says that we can transcend time, doesn't it? What if two people measured it differently? Yes.

At the same time. And wouldn't the observer be intimately connected with that which he or she observed? For sure. And that, you know, Einstein and all those guys that conceived of quantum physics were driven nuts by these notions. Third concept, there's an objective world.

Now, that's not our fault. That's Newton. We talked about this. Newton, 307 years ago, roughly, give or take a few. An apple whacks him on the head.

He goes, hey, there's gravity. It's downhill from here. But he goes, I'm not gravity. I'm not the apple. I'm Newton.

So he says there's an objective role. Okay. But the fact is that we are intimately connected to all that there is. We're intimately connected to all that there is. And the fact is that all we have is our perceptions.

And our perceptions are due to our neurology and our boundaries. Our perceptions are due to our neurology and the boundaries which we perceive. Think about this for a minute. A movie. You been to the movies recently?

What did you see? You saw Fargo. Did you enjoy it? Did you have any problem looking at the pictures on the screen? They were okay, right?

And how many frames a second does the movie move at? Do you know? Does anybody know? 24. The movie moves at 24 frames a second. Why do we see it as a movie?

It's 24 still pictures. It's 24 still pictures a second. Why does it look like a movie to us? Why does it look like it moves? Persistence of vision.

Thanks. Murray's obviously studied his, either he's got a degree in broadcasting and film or neurology. Persistence of vision. Persistence of vision is why the film looks like it's moving. Persistence of vision is why the film looks like it's moving.

But if you were an insect who had much less persistence of vision, in other words, many more frames were possible, the movie would look like a series of still pictures. Actually, it would look like a flick, right, it would look like a series of pictures shutting on and off, because there's black between every picture in a movie. So, the question is, why is it that way? Here's another way to look at it. Before we conceived that the earth was round, as a race, a species of people, before we conceived that the earth was round, for all practical purposes, it was flat.

Because we believed it was flat. People would not venture off the edge of the flat earth because they might fall off. And what it took was someone changing our perception and that changed the world for us, didn't it? That totally changed the world for us. So, if the world changes by changing our perception, and since we're intimately connected to all that there is, this is really important.

Our perception is based on the instrument that we choose to observe what it is that we're observing. This has a very important application for neuro-linguistic programming, by the way. I'll say this again. Our perception is based on the instrument that we choose to observe what we're observing. Actually, Deepak Chopra said that.

OK? This is the end of tape four, side B. Thank you................................................................................................................................. Thank you.