# Modeling, Boardbreaking

What we're going to do is this will be our modeling project. Most NLP master practitioner trainings actually do a modeling project where they model some behavior. And in many trainings, I guess, in many trainings they just pick something to model, but we thought we'd pick something significant, which is how one breaks through certain limitations. By the way, this segment is not required for you to be certified as a master practitioner of NLP. You don't need to break your board in order to be certified.

That's not part of it. But what this will allow you to do is it will allow you to discover, among other things, your congruency and your ability to follow through and your ability to actually do modeling. For me, I kind of like the process because it tells me how I'm doing in terms of allowing the energy to flow through me and around me and how I I'm allowing the energy to be, and also how I'm relating to that thing there, which looks like about 12 inches square of board. So this is a modeling project, and what we'd like to do is I'd like you to model me, but first I want to look at your boards, because I said we'd have have a special contest and somebody who... Joe, look at the things here.

What are these things, Joe? My major outcome is to effectively use hypnotic language patterns in trainings to enhance learning. But what are these little happy faces here? These people are happy with the presentation that I'm giving. Oh, this is you giving a presentation?

That's me. They're happy people, and there's V-A-K-A-D going out. No G or O. No O-G? No O-G.

No, no, no. That kind of stinks to me. Yeah, that's right. But, no, that's what's going out to all the happy faces who are connected. No gustatory either, I noticed.

No gustatory, no. Okay. Good. Okay, Joe. That's good.

What do you think of Joe's board? Whoa, what's on the other side? On the back is the... These are unhappy faces. Unhappy faces, people running away, and the lines coming out are blah, blah, blah.

I think we've heard blah, blah, blah before. On some other tape set. Not on this one. We never said that. And there's fear, and I'm not good enough, and I don't deserve anything.

That's the thing you're breaking through? That's breaking through, and the outcomes are all the things that are... Excellent. By the way, what's the purpose of you writing this stuff on your board? From a modeling point of view, what's the purpose of putting...

Huh? What's the... From a modeling point of view, what's the purpose of writing this stuff on your board? I said breaking through the boundaries. From an NLP point of view, yeah.

But from the modeling point of view, what's the purpose? Do you know? The purpose is for you to have a why. Some kind of motivation. An additional motivation to board breaking.

I think it probably would be a good idea before you break a board to have a reason why you're going to break the board. To construct that for yourself. For me, when I break a board, it tells me that I'm in control. See, here's the deal. Before I actually did a board break, I used to wake up in the morning and I thought my body was in charge of how I felt.

And some mornings I wake up and feel good and some mornings I wake up and feel, I don't know if you ever do that. And some mornings I wake up and feel good, and some mornings I wake up and feel, ah. I don't know if you ever do that. And you know that until I broke a board, I didn't realize I was in charge of how my body, or how I, I didn't realize I was in charge of my body. And now I realize, and of course this is all NLP stuff, right?

Now I realize I am, and this is the thing that taught me that at the unconscious level. That might be something that you'd want to do or anything that you want to do, putting this stuff on the board is good. Okay, who else wants to show us their board? You have a few colors on there, son. Just a few.

What's the deal? Oh, let me hold it up, yeah. This is the, is this the, which side is this? That's the front side. The front side.

This is your side. And what's on the back? That's blowing out the boundaries. These are boundaries being blown out. Oh, cool.

All these various things. And these are the strings being let go. And now these are just falling off into, like, you know, beyond the void. Beyond the void, no. Beyond the void.

Oh, I don't know how to think about that. Rosemary, the rumor is you've got a good one over here. That's got glitter and everything here. Look at that. Y'all see that?

A magnificent winged... Is that winged? I'm not an angel in there. No, not really. What's the deal with the hat here?

It's not a hat. It's not a hat. I'm superimposed on a star. You're superimposed on a star. That's fabulous.

And I'm floating out there. Oh, everybody likes that. I love it too. And those are styrofoam bricks. Styrofoam bricks.

And that's not my brain. That's not your brain. On boredom. That's great. That's fabulous.

Who else has one that I ought to see? What do we got, Arno? Let's see. Is this thing in the middle, is that a knot pattern? Oh, that's the void.

The void. It says here, my outcomes. And then there's all kinds of outcomes like leadership responsibility, lots of money, excitement way over the top, wild spontaneity. Well, I have to have enough qualifiers to make it real. Exactly.

Absolutely. I'm with you. And then obstacles on the back. He's going to let go. Excellent.

Who else's board should I see? Yvonne, why are we not looking at your board? Well, you can if you want. I can if I want. Okay.

You want to explain it? Really? Okay. Well, why don't you pick it up then and show it to the folks in the room here. I'll show the opposite side.

Right. And that is as creative as I could have been prior to coming here. What's on there? There's a butterfly. And what it is is someone without an ear to hear properly.

Whoa. Without eyes that can't see properly. Can't see the beautiful things that are around because they are behind barriers. And the moth in the middle comes from Aboriginal Dreamtime. The story of the valley that I lived in was ruled by a half-man, half-moth.

And his beautiful wife was bathed in the colours of the rainbow. And he warned her not to go up into the mountains, but she did. And while while she was there she was covered in an avalanche of snow and when she got out all her beautiful colours had gone and she was just a brown moth and in her shame she hid in the night blindly searching for a shaft of light and her colours come out every spring in the beautiful flowers on the mountains. And I felt like that moth. That's great, Yvonne.

That's great. Now, what's the other side? That's fabulous. Look at this. It's like totally flowered up here.

There's a whole bouquet of flowers and stars. Each flower represents a different chakra. The red is to give me the flame of desire and passion. You guys are so cosmic. I love it.

That's the first chakra. And the orange is for the free expression of all my emotions excellent that's the second the yellow is for the joy and happiness that i want in my life third and the green is the heart yeah so that i hope i can open that up the blue is nurturing and communication that's the fifth and that's what i want and i couldn't find indigo so i got the fifth. And that's what I want. And I couldn't find indigo, so I got the closest to it. That's pretty close.

Yeah, it's kind of purple-blue. Yeah, that's good. Which is the third eye, which I would like to be fully opened. By when? The violet.

Now. Now, good. The violet is the top chakra to be opened up. And then turquoise is communicating from the heart, which I hope to be able to do. And the magenta is to have unconditional love, but with oomph.

The pink is to know unconditional love and to be able to give it and have the love of my life. And it goes out to all areas. And the white is the light, my spiritual being, shining through in the center of it all and reaching up to the stars. Whoa, look at that. And the gold ribbon is not just passing, but with excellence.

And the stars down here are all the other stars I will get for everything else I do with excellence. And the sunflower is that now I've come out into the daylight. Oh, that's great. That's great. Oh, that's just terrific.

Would you guys vote that's the best one? We're definitely ready to do this. And one of the interesting things is that the more positive reasons you can create for breaking a board, oftentimes the easier it goes. So let's see. You guys ready?

So here's what we're going to do. We're going to do a modeling project. We're going to do a standard modeling project. Here I am. And I'm the person who's broken a board.

We're actually, what I'd like to do in the process of doing this board break is to ask, is for you to, actually what I'd like to do is we're going to give you the opportunity to model a number of different people so that you'll have the opportunity to see how many different ways a board can be broken and then we'll actually go do it. We'll do this as quickly as we can and I'll'll show you personally how I do it, and then you'll have the opportunity to model how else it's done. And we'll get the opportunity to see how that goes. So what we'll do with the first part of the project is you can, we'll go through, I'll break a board or however you want to do it, because you guys are the modelers, right? And I'm just the person who breaks the board.

I'm just the person who breaks the board and what I'd like you to do is to go ahead and find out, because this is a modeling project, what you need to do is go ahead and find out how I break the board because you're going to install it yourself and you're going to do the same thing. So that's where we begin and we'll start with the modeling project. Who's ready for the first question? Okay. What is your belief about breaking the board, and how do you represent that?

How do you say that to yourself? Let's see. I have a number of beliefs about breaking the board. One is that the board is stronger than your hand is, actually. So it's not the strength of your hand that breaks the board, but it's the energy that you use and the speed of your hand through the board.

That's the first belief. And the second belief is, let's see, that it allows me to, I guess I've shared some of these with you, it allows me to be, to know if I'm in control of my state or not. So I use board breaking more for the issue of knowing I can be in charge of my state rather than anything else. Those, I guess I would say that those are the two primary beliefs that, and I think of the most important is that it's the speed of your hand through the board and the energy that you project. Because what will happen is when we break, when I actually, when you break the board yourself, what you'll actually see is that when you're, when you're doing it really right, what you'll see is that the board, it's, the board will break actually before your hand touches it.

Or before you put your hand through it. And for those of you who think, for those of you who are big guys and you've already broken a board in your life or whatever, I'm going to break the board without taking my hand off the board, just to up the ante a little bit. So I'll do what's commonly called a one-inch or a six-inch break. And by the way, in most karate schools, doing any kind of a break takes up to three months or six months up to about three years before you actually learn how to do this. So since this is an LP, we'll learn it in the next hour or so.

And we'll do it and we'll all have fun breaking our boards. So those are the beliefs. Yeah? I remember on the tapes you said you didn't say anything to yourself while you were doing it. Do you say anything in preparation before you do it?

Since I haven't broken the board yet, I have no idea. I've been modeled before, but I'll pretend I haven't been. So if you were modeling me, and you were really modeling me, what I would say to you is, I have no idea. Because I haven't done that yet. I'm just curious, do you make a picture ahead of time?

Do you know if you make a picture? Do you see your hand go through the board? Or is that something you also... Actually, if you're going to model me, you probably want to put me in the position of breaking a board, watch it, and then ask me questions about it, and then watch me do it again. Oh, okay.

Does that work? Okay. Okay, so what I'll do is I'll break a board first, and then you can have the opportunity to look at it. What I'll do is I'll do a six-inch break, which essentially is keeping my hand on the board. So for me, and everybody does it a little different, I have some idiosyncratic behaviors that I do first, which is I have to look at the board from a certain angle.

Now that I'm doing it, I remember that. I forgot that a moment ago. And I have to make sure it's just right. By the way, if you're going to do this at home for fun, the grain lines up with the bricks. In other words, so you have bricks on either side, and the grain lines up with the bricks.

Rather than the little individual pieces of grain touching the bricks, that's not the right way. This is the right way. You could probably break the board the other way, but it would take a significant amount of additional energy and speed. So, rule of thumb, we always break the board with the grain lined up with the bricks. And then the other thing I always check to make sure is that the least amount of board is on the bricks.

Least amount of board possible is on the bricks. So as little board as can be on the bricks and the board still be staying on the bricks. And I'll also show you this breathing technique. What I do, first of all, is a breathing technique to increase my energy because I'm doing it with energy. If you're going to do this yourself, you should wait to do the breathing technique until it's time to break the board.

But I'll just do this a couple times, and then when my energy's right, I'll step up and break the board was a little far off. The bricks were a little too far apart, and the board actually popped off and went straight down. And so now what you get to see is you get to see me do a recovery strategy. Because what happened is I didn't actually break the board just then. Yeah, I'm actually going to, I think I ought to move these over so they're the same height.

Yeah, it was a little far apart there too, I think. Okay. Whoa. Twice. I love it.

Okay. Good. So I move the bricks closer again. Okay, now you definitely get to see a recovery strategy. That's it.

There we go. Yeah, that was interesting. That's the longest it's taken me to do that. That's fun. Okay, so questions.

Great. What are you thinking distance-wise? You're thinking through it, right? Distance-wise. The hand needs to go, you need to be, when you're actually doing this, your hand needs to go all the way down.

You need to be going all the way, at least three-quarters of the way down through the bricks to the floor. So in terms of follow-through, your follow-through ought not to be at the top of the brick, but you need to be prepared for the physiology of the hand going all the way down like that, three-quarters of the way down the bricks. Not all the way to the floor, but three-quarters of the way down. At least that's what I'm doing in terms of physiology, yeah. And remember, it's the speed of the hand through the board, too, that makes a difference.

When you actually decide to put your hand through the board, how is it you know when to do it? That's the important question. So what happens for me is, is I build up my energy. You may notice my energy is a little different right now than before I did the board break. And what I do is I build up my energy until I feel energy here in my, below my navel.

Actually, what I'll do is I'll do that breathing technique, which I'll go through once or twice. Would you like to do that now? Just to see how it works? Okay, let's do it. We're going to do this only once or twice.

If you're doing it at home, don't do it until you're ready to break the board. But what I want you to do is have the experience of it. So you all ought to practice it. So if you would, why don't you go ahead and stand up. And what I do is simply knees bent.

I reach over the top of my head. I imagine the sun above the top of my head as a bright ball of light. I reach up and grab the sun, open the top of my head and bring it down into my head and then push all the way down from here down to right below the navel. So I'm actually bringing the energy in through the top of my head and pushing down to here. And it's done very quickly.

It's done very quickly. We'll do it all together. You guys ready? One, two, three. As quickly as you can exhale the breath.

Next one. Notice the difference in the energy? Yeah. Okay, don't do it a lot because you need to save it all for when it's time for you to break the board. Okay, yes.

Okay, you used some other kind of energy that I would like to know how you did it when you had your hand on the board and you were wiggling your fingers and looking at them? Yeah. If you could explain what you were doing. I was just making sure my hand was loose. It was the other hand you were wiggling.

This hand? I was wiggling this hand? Yeah. You were going like this and looking at your fingers. You were like this.

Oh, I don't remember that. Was I? Oh. Yeah. Maybe I'm just leaning on my knee.

I thought that was an important technique. No. Oh, like this? Yeah. Oh, that's just to make sure the shoulders are moving.

Yeah, let's talk about that. Not like this. Yeah, it's not the fingers. Here, stand up, would you please, for just a second. What you want to do is you want to, the thing that makes the board break is your shoulders moving very, very quickly.

So, what you're going to do is you're going to, first of all, pull your shoulders, let's say, You're going to use your primary hand, so pull your primary hand back, like this. Have your non-primary hand forward, and I want you to, just for a moment, pull your non-dominant hand back as you push your dominant hand forward. So if you're right-handed, you'll pull your left hand back and push your right hand forward as fast as you can, like this. that's how fast you want to move your shoulders through the board. And it's the, it's the, it's the shift of the shoulders that does that. So I don't know what my fingers were doing, but what I was doing is making sure my shoulders were in the right place to do that.

See? I want to make sure my shoulders were in the right place. The question is, when did I decide it was time to break the board? So what happens is I, the energy starts in my stomach and then it rises up through the central column and comes down my arm and out my hand. And the minute I feel the energy pass through my hand, I have a picture of the board broken and then I put my hand through the board.

But if the energy doesn't pass, sometimes the energy passes through my hand and I can't get a picture of the board broken so I don't break the board. So what it is, is I feel the energy rise up from the center, come up through the central column inside my body, and then the energy comes down my arm. And when I feel the energy pass through my hand into the board, or when it's ready to pass through my hand, then I have a picture of the board broken, and then I go ahead and break it. Associated. When you feel it passing through your hand, are you aware of your hand being totally relaxed?

No, it's actually not totally relaxed because one of the things I'm doing is I'm pulling my fingers back so that the heel of the hand touches first. So where the board wants to be hit is with the heel of your hand going around from your thumb. It's kind of like where the wrist bone comes into the hand is where you want to hit the board with. You don't want to hit the board with your fingers, so I'm pulling my fingers back to get them out of the way. So the hand is definitely not relaxed.

I'm making sure that the heel of the hand hits the board first. When you seem to be assessing the energy just before you're ready to do the break. Right, I'm just sort of making sure it comes up. Any other thoughts that are going on? If there are any thoughts that are positive, like I can do this or I've done it before.

The hand is straight onto the board to the angulation? That's a very good question. When you stand at the board, you're standing at the bricks, what you want to do is you want to position your hand so that as it hangs relaxed, the hand falls over the center of the board. Because look what happens if you position your hand when it's relaxed so it falls over here, and then you're trying to break it this way. So, or if I'm back here, and I'm having to reach out like this to break the board, notice that I'm going at an angle.

So what I'm really doing is I'm taking my entire weight and energy and putting it all right up on top of the board like this, with my elbow and arm totally straight at the moment of break, so that the hand goes straight down, and all of that energy is focused from there, from the heel of the hand, through the arm, through the board, all the way like that. Where are you looking when you do that? Are you looking through the board? Most of the time my eyes are closed. But in order to close your eyes, you need to make sure that you've got your physiology right.

Because otherwise you may need to have your eyes open so that you can guide your hand to the board. So you really need to be sure of your physiology and your stance. So what I do is I take my left foot, and I put it in front of the two bricks that are holding the board, angled in at about a 45-degree angle, and so that the top part of my calf just below my knee is touching the bricks. And then I squat down like that by putting my right foot back so that my hand falls right in the middle of the board. This hand is not, it simply holds onto the knee to get the position right and then I let go of the knee because I need that hand, the left hand to whip around like that to make the shoulders move.

And then the hand actually still relaxed falls in the center of the board. So I know that the physiology essentially is that I'm, wherever I go I'll be in the center of the board because that's where the physiology is. Right? Because that's where my hand falls naturally when it's relaxed. So I'm going to come forward like this.

So from my calf touching the brick, I'm going to lean forward so that my calf is almost, or it is actually vertical, or my lower part of my leg is vertical, up to my knee, and my hand is falling into the center of the board. It looks like balance might be really important. Do you make sure you get your balance? I'm not great at balance, but I do make sure I'm in balance before I start this. My right foot is extended backwards at an angle, but both feet are approximately in the...

The left foot is just to the left of the board, and the right foot is definitely aligned with the back of the board, or the right foot's aligned with the board in the back. And my right foot's extended way out, and my foot is almost parallel to the back of the bricks. Yes? Are you in peripheral vision? I'm not aware of whether I am or not at that point.

I am now. Probably I am. Yeah, probably I am. Are you, will board break if you don't break it in exactly the center? Sure.

There are people that do that all the time. What's your relationship to the board when you break it? I like to talk to the board to make sure they're ready to go. Kind of look at it. I picked out, you know, this is a bunch of boards.

I took one that felt right. Tab, I was watching your face. I don't know, are you creating a picture in your mind? Are you associated or disassociated? Associated.

You're associated. And, I mean, what is it? Is it a still? Is it a movie? It's a still.

It's a still. It's a still. The board is roughly, it's broken roughly at a 45 degree angle from being not broken. And my hand is all the way through up to about here. That's the picture that I see associated.

And that happens right after I feel the energy go through my hand. What happened in your head that was different when you broke it and when you didn't break it? Was there something different going on? Well, I don't think the bricks were right. Okay.

Yeah, I don't think the bricks were right. But when you don't break a board, then you have to go through a recovery strategy anyway. Because you didn't break it. So for me, then, the recovery strategy is like stacking up and remembering all the times I've broken it before. How do you actually get the energy to move up your body and down your arm?

I don't know. It just sort of seems to build up, and when I'm ready, then I'm there, and it just sort of starts moving. I don't really know. It just sort of starts moving. I don't think that I do it.

It sort of does it. Maybe by intention. Maybe by the intention of I'm ready to break the board. I'm ready to move the energy. I'm ready to do it.

Do you actually see a picture of the energy moving up through your body and down your arm? I feel it. And sometimes I look inside my body too and notice where it is. And it's associated. If I am, I don't always have a picture.

But if I am, it's associated looking at it and I can see it rising up. Do you exhale as you break the board? Yes. By the way, those of you that have wrist or back or arm or shoulder or neck problems probably should not do this. The assistants will show you how to break a board with your foot.

There's no reason to break a board. If your unconscious mind tells you not to break a board, then you probably shouldn't. Yes? Dad, could you move the board and just slow it down and show how you, just the physiology, how you do it? The physiology, sure.

Okay. So what I do is I'll step up here and make sure my foot's in the right place. I have a kinesthetic on the back of my leg where my calf touches the thing, and then I'll get my right foot back so that my hand is actually right in the center. And then I'll, let me just show you the movement. So the movement is like I want to keep my hand on the board, right?

So the movement goes like this. If you're not doing a one-inch break, then those of you that have done a board break before should probably try a one-inch break. If you haven't done a board break before, you should use a full stroke. So a full hit would look like this. You simply pull your hand up all the way here like this and then bring it down.

And what that would look like is it would look like this. It would be very fast. And you want to whip your shoulders around because it's the speed of the hand through the board and the energy that breaks the board. So the hand wants to go through the board very fast, and it wants to go all the way to the floor. Okay?

I'll do one more demo, and then we'll have the opportunity to see some other demo. Let's see. Before you do actually break the board, you want to make sure you ask your unconscious mind if it's okay. If you're listening to the tapes, if you break the board any other way than the way we're showing you, you're on your own. Actually, here, too.

This is the only way we're demonstrating, which is the board on two bricks. You should look in the back of your notebook for a picture of that, actually, the way it looks, and there will be some pictures of people breaking boards back there. If you break it any other way than the way we're teaching it, you're on your own. You can break the board with your foot. I'll tell you one more story, then I'll demonstrate it, and then we'll have an opportunity to look at other ways of doing it.

On our tape set, in fact. And the tape set on the training, Patty on the tape set, I don't remember Patty on the tape set, she actually didn't break her board during the board break. And we were at the practice training and she finished up and she took her board home and she was so, she said she was so grumpy with herself for not breaking the board, she went home and she bought like a stack of lumber and went home that night and broke all of it. Not in the afternoon and went home that night and broke all of the lumber at home. So you can choose to break the board here or not.

It's totally up to you. And again, as I mentioned, you should check with your unconscious mind, make sure it's okay to proceed and do this to make sure that it's totally all right. And it's not about breaking the board. You're being certified. certified is not about breaking the board. This is simply a modeling project.

Okay, so I'll just do it one more time here. And I like to do a one-inch break, so... Got to make sure the board's in the right place, so I've adjusted the board a couple times just to make sure, you know. That's better. Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

Ah! Ah! Ah! That was good. Okay.

This is the end of tape 18, side B.