# Parts, Sleight Of Mouth Patters

There are some questions. We had an interesting thing there working with Matthew. We got both of his parts up to the unlimitedness, and then we find out he's got a boss part that runs those. And then we came to find out that there was a boss part several echelons up above that boss part. That's what we were talking about, hierarchy of parts.

I guess he must have a parts union. That would be local 301. Finally, he asked for the hierarchy of parts, so we did that, and he turned a lovely shade of purple. Yeah, it was great. Is that beyond more blood flow then?

Yeah, it had pretty decent integration, it looked like. Good for you, Murray. That's great. It was a great lesson because we both had sort of sneaky parts. Sneaky parts?

Ted, you've mentioned several times that in our small branch of NLP, the idea is for the greatest amount of integration, and other branches seem to want to have more parts. Not necessarily. But what would be the purpose? Maybe not more parts, but what would be the purpose of other parts or installing parts? There are NLP trainers, whose names you would know, who actually, in order to get greater access to more behaviors, actually install parts.

In fact, there's one organization that installs parts in its trainers, and they train inside a part. The problem I have with that, of course, is that I have a couple of problems with it. But it seems to me that greater parts at the unconscious level means greater possibility of conflict. So I'm not really in favor of that. I think the unconscious mind can operate very well, thank you, as a whole integrated functioning unit.

And so I think that fewer parts are better than more parts. I would say that's the case. So, personally I'm for integration. However, the field of NLP is big enough that I think we could have philosophical differences, and I think you're going to have to decide for yourself when you go out and do your, and you become your master practitioner and you're working with clients, you're going to have to decide if more parts is better than fewer parts. But when I look at people, I think with greater parts, there's more chance for incongruency, there's more chance for conflict at the unconscious level, and so forth.

And so, personally, I go for wholeness on that level. And I had a discussion with someone in NLP whose name you probably would know. And, you know, the point of view of this person was that more parts were better because it gave you more access to behaviors that you didn't normally have. My point of view is that the parts actually provide boundaries to our behavior and that if we could have a full range of behavior in ourself, in us, in being ourselves, then I think that's the preferable way to go. When you were referring to Deepak Chopra's work before, reading some of his books, when he talks about the idea of self, he says that from his perspective, you are who you are when you are being what you are.

Is that a quantum linguistical statement? So when you're being dad, you're dad, you're no one else. When you're being a teacher, you're a teacher. Would you relate that into different parts? I just have an incongruency between when you're talking about parts in that statement, they seem to be in conflict, yet I agree with both.

Yeah. Well, my point of view is the more integration we can get, the better. So if when you're dad, if when you are, quote, dad, if you're operating from a different part, and when you're, quote, teacher, you're operating from a different part, I would say that your functioning probably would be improved to have access to both sets of behaviors across the boundaries of those parts, if you were operating from a part, right? So there are some great attributes that you would have as a father, which certainly would serve your students if you were a teacher. It would certainly serve your students for them to have the experience of you as that nurturing, loving parent.

So my whole thing is integrate the parts of the unconscious level. And I'm not sure what Dr. Chopra means by that statement. I'd like to read it. Actually, I haven't read that particularly.

But I would say that I'll still stand by my notion that wholeness at the unconscious level is, I think, the highest operating state that one, and I think personally I strive for that, and I think it's appropriate to assist your clients in moving in that direction, at very least. One of the rules of thumb is if it ain't broke, don't fix it. And, of course, I think one of the things we could point out is that you could be operating from different parts and the parts not be in conflict. The issue that we're dealing with here, and so no intervention is necessary. The issue here is, is there a conflict?

And if there is, then, of course, we want to integrate that. All right, let's talk about sleight of mouth. We're going to be looking at Section 7, so grab your blue tab in your notebook and flip it over to the left. Many, many years ago, I think, Robert Diltz and Todd Epstein noticed that Richard Bandler never lost an argument, and so they set out the rather formidable task to figure out how he did that, and sleleight of Mouth was a series of patterns that were generated based on analyzing certain language patterns. Sleight of Mouth is kind of like a recipe.

It's kind of like a recipe in that what we have is we have a statement that the client makes, and then we have a way of generating 16 reframes around that. Let's look at a diagram of what Sleight of Mouth actually looks like if you turn to the very last page in Section 7, and take one of those out so you can be looking at it as we go through the different patterns. Originally, Sleight of Mouth in NLP was taught in a weekend seminar. So I want you to know that people would spend an entire weekend on learning this process. And the way Sleight of Mouth was originally taught was that you would go through a number of patterns.

You'd actually hear a bunch of different patterns or a bunch of different ways of responding to a certain utterance from a client. And you would then end up being magically able to generate the patterns. Well, it occurred to me that that took a little long to do. So what I did was I actually set down some questions that you could ask yourself in order to automatically generate the patterns. Let's look and see what the patterns look like, first of all.

We've got our diagram, and we're also going to start at page 7-1. And let's use the second one. It's kind of a fun one. And we'll go through and look at each one of those, and we'll look at the diagram and see essentially what it does. The one we'll use that we'll go through for each of the patterns is, you're being late means you don't care about me.

And what's going to happen is, is that we're going to generate some patterns that will reframe that. So slight of mouth is a way of reframing. I think slight of mouth was originally, was originally intended to be what quantum linguistics is. Slight of mouth has actually now been around for quite a few years now. And I think that there's a lot more going on, or there was a lot more going on in the utterances that were modeled than what was picked up.

But let's look and see the patterns that came out of it. The first is, oh, yeah, sleight mouth is, I also need to say that slight of mouth is most useful in a situation where you either have a cause and effect or a complex equivalence. So slight of mouth, and that's why the diagram right there says, has an A and a B. If you look in the center of your diagram, there's an A and a B with an arrow pointing from A to B, which is the cause and effect. And then underneath that arrow, there's an equal sign, which indicates that it's either going to be the arrow, meaning cause and effect, or the equal sign, meaning complex equivalence.

If you have a situation where you don't have cause and effect or complex equivalence, you could ask a bunch of questions to get the client to go to, you could use Metamodel, Milton Model, or whatever questioning pattern you wanted to use to get the client to cause an effect, or to get the client to complex equivalence. Okay, so let's look at a complex equivalence statement. We're looking at page 7-1, and we'll go through the second one in each of these. Not the second number, but the second equivalent. So, in this case, we'll use the sentence, you're being late means you don't care about me.

If we were to go meta-frame on the whole equivalence, if you look at meta-frame, it's on the top of your diagram. The answer or the response would be, you're just feeling that way because you build unrealistic expectations about other people and then blame it on them when you get disappointed. Okay? Interesting reframe, huh? Let's look at number two.

This is apply to self. Apply to self, by the way, is one of my favorites. Apply to self is very useful, not just in slight of mouth, but in a number of different cases, as well as in prime concerns and quantum linguistics. The statement, you're being late, means you don't care about me. We're going to apply to self, which is in your little circle. on the cause or actually on the evidence.

So you say, now you tell me I wish you'd cared enough about me to tell me earlier. Number three. We're going to change the frame size. We could either change the size or the context on the evidence. You're being late means you don't care about me.

One answer is better late than never. The other one is with the warm, caring reception I get when I do get here, I ought to be risking my life to get here every spare minute. Oh, a little testy on that one, are we? Okay. Now you're beginning to understand the process.

Good. Let's go to number four. Reality strategy on evidence. Reality strategy. The reality strategy is in the upper left-hand side of your diagram.

You're being late means you don't care about me. The question, reality strategy, how do you know lateness and caring are equivalent? Number five, we could work with a model of the world that's right under and to the right of reality strategy on the evidence. You're being late means you don't care about me. Most people I know judge caring on the basis of sensitivity to others' feelings, not their awareness of time.

I just read them the way I get them, folks. Number six, page 7-4. Number six, you're going to look at the intent, which is on the very left-hand side to the left of A. On the evidence, you're being late means you don't care about me. You look at the intent.

My intent wasn't to be late or to be uncaring, but rather to finish my work so I could spend the highest quality time with you. Isn't that nice? Isn't that special? Number seven, counterexample on cause evidence. Counterexample is down in the bottom left.

You're being late means you don't care about me. Counterexample, is it possible to be late and still care? Is it possible to be uncaring and punctual? Number eight, we're going to redefine on the cause or the evidence. Redefine is going off of A.

Your being late means you don't care about me. A, redefine, I'm not late, I was delayed. Some people in the room say that'll never work. Not with me, it won't. Number nine, chunk up.

Chunk up. Chunking up. Number nine. That's actually below A and B, but we can do that. Chunking up.

You're being late because you don't care about me? Are you saying the most fundamental aspect of our relationship is simply a matter of time? Whoa, let's chunk up to the whole thing, you know? Ooh. Number ten, redefine on effect or values or belief.

So we're going to redefine. That redefinition comes off of B. So we're redefining based on the effect, the values, or beliefs. Your being late means you don't care about me. It's not that I don't care.

It's just that I show my caring differently. Whoa. Number 11. Chunk down. Chunk down on effect, belief, and value.

So chunking down is directly below number A. You're being late means you don't care about me. Late, how specifically? Don't care, how specifically? How specifically does lateness mean not caring?

Next one is metaphor. You could do a whole metaphor. Metaphor is very simple. You just tell a story, right? A metaphor or an analogy.

That's right below number B, by the way. You're being late means you don't care about me. If a surgeon is late for dinner because he's saving someone's life, does that mean he doesn't care about eating? We just take him the way we got him here, folks. Number 13.

Another outcome. Another outcome is in the bottom right. You're being late means you don't care about me. Whether I'm late or uncaring isn't the issue. But rather, can we meet each other's need in this relationship without laying any unnecessary trips on one another?

Makes me sweat. Number 14, consequence. Where are we going with this? Where are we going with this? Your being late means you don't care about me?

If I hadn't been late, I might have lost my job, but I cared too much about you to risk it. Whoa. Absolutely. It's required, in fact. Number 15, the hierarchy of criteria.

So we're actually going to look at the person's values. You're being late means you don't care about me. Oh, sorry, the values are in the upper right, kind of just slightly below metaframe into the right of B, upper right above B. You're being late means you don't care about me. Isn't it more important to fulfill my responsibility, that's a value, to the people who are depending on me, supposedly another value, than to be punctual?

So we're utilizing two values there. Number 16, apply to self on the belief-value effect. You're being late means you don't care about me. A really caring person would be able to overlook a little tardiness now and then. Okay.

Now, here's the deal with sleight of mouth. Let me just say that from time to time, sleight of mouth has been known to be, shall we say, somewhat abrasive. Did you notice that? Oh, you did. Oh, good.

Sometimes people who use slight of mouth have seemed to be a little like meta monsters. I don't know if you've heard that term before. It's people that overuse the meta model. Well, there's also slight of mouth monsters, and so what I would really recommend is that you use these with caring and with heart, and in addition, by the way, that you also use a softening frame if you want to. Softening frames are really important.

Usually this entire process of learning slight of mouth took two and a half days. In fact, I know a number of people that attended a two and a half day workshop. My point of view was to write some questions that would help you develop the slight of mouth patterns yourself, because most slight of mouth is developed in the following way. What most people do is they write out the common objections they have in business, or if you're in therapy, the common objections they have in therapy, or the common objections that they have in education, whatever the area that you're going to be using them in. Then you develop the responses, and then you memorize the responses, essentially.

Just in the same way, if you've taken a sales training, many people here have taken sales trainings, and I remember when I took radio sales training, they gave us the 10 most common objections to buying radio advertising. We memorized them, and then we would use them as answers to objections. Well, the neat thing about Sleight of Mouth is we had one answer for each of the 10 objections, so we had 10 answers. Sleight of Mouth will actually give you 16 answers for each possible objection, which will give you a whole bunch of more choices. So what I'm going to recommend in a minute is that you get together with someone in a group in the same area of your interest and develop sleight of mouth patterns in an area of interest that you agree upon.

So let's look and see what the questions would be that would allow us to develop those patterns. And the way to do this, by the way, is to simply, the client gives you a cause and effect or a complex equivalence, and then you just ask yourself, not them, you ask yourself one of these questions and then jot it down in the slight of mouth pattern worksheet or give the response to the client in that way. So let's go through the questions and what's possible. First of all, Metaframe, we're looking at page 711. Okay, so Metaframe, if you have a cause and effect or complex equivalence in order to develop an answer to that, which is Metaframe, you simply ask yourself, how is it possible that they could believe that?

If you're working on a reality strategy, reality strategy is to the left of Metaframe, client gives you a cause and effect or complex equivalence, you say, how do they represent that belief, or how do they, or how would you know, to the client, how would you know if it's not true? Model of the world. If you're going to challenge the model of the world, you could either switch referential index or ask, is this true in everyone's model of the world? To apply to self, actually don't think about it. Just use one of the words back on itself.

Don't even think about the client statements. Just grab onto the most important word in the statement and apply it to self. I'm going to come back and I'll show you some examples in a moment. Next thing is to change frame size. That's directly above the A and the B.

You can think of something larger or smaller that they haven't noticed. You can think of a different frame with the same behavior. Or you can chunk up to a universal quantifier. You can chunk up to a universal quantifier. Hierarchy of ideas is the next one, or values.

Hierarchy of a criteria, sorry, or values. That's in the right, right above consequences, on the right-hand side of your diagram. You can ask yourself, what are higher values? If you already have the client's values, just utilize one of the higher values. If you don't have the client's values, then hallucinate what might be several of the client's values and put them in the same sentence.

Or you can apply the current value to the current sentence. So those are two ways to get to work with the values. Next one is consequence. And the consequence is to the right of B. The question is what will happen to the client if they continue to think this way or the person you're working with.

Next one is another outcome. Another outcome is to the, to the bottom right of your chart. What's another outcome you could shift to? Metaphor analogy, tell a metaphor or a story about the solution. About the solution.

Redefine. Redefine is is either below A and below B. The process is the same for either one. You say, what other meaning could this equation have? So the equation is A equals B or A causes B.

You ask yourself, what other meaning could this equation have? Hallucinate that and give it as a response. Or you could say, and this is really interesting, A doesn't equal B. A equals C, and that's D. I'll show you how to work that in just a minute.

We're going to go back and look at examples and how that happened. Okay, the next one, to chunk down, you're going to ask what specifically or what are examples of this or what are parts of this. If you want to chunk up, and those are both chunking up and chunking down are below A and B, for what purpose, what's important about this, or you could exaggerate. Or you could do counterexample, And if you're going to do counterexample, you either invert the belief, counterexample's on the lower left. You could make it into a universal statement.

You could say, was there ever a time when A was not equal to B? Or you could say if, you could say A causes B, not B causes A. So you could actually invert or change that that way. And then finally, the intent. The question is, why are they saying this?

The intent's on the left of A. You can say, why are they saying this? What is the secondary gain? Or what are they trying to get? All right, so let's look and see now how the questions will develop the answers.

If you want to go back to page 1, we'll just do a few of these. So you might want to take page 711 and compare to page 71. So we're looking at Metaframe, and we'll use saying bad things means you are a bad person, and what you say to the client is, you're just saying that because you are oversensitive. So how is it possible they could believe that? You're just saying that because you're oversensitive.

Right? Okay, number two. Let's turn to page 7-2. You're going to apply to self. Apply to self is halfway down page 7-11.

So you say, saying mean things means you're a bad person. The word you focused in on was mean. You say it's pretty mean for you to say that. Or it's a pretty mean thing to say. So without thinking about it, you just take the word, you just take one of the main words in the sentence, one of the major presuppositions of the sentence, and use it back in itself.

Number three. Changing the frame size. Changing the frame size. Saying mean things means you're a bad person. The question is, let's see, let's look and see.

Something smaller or larger that they hadn't noticed. Hmm, okay. You say, well, it may seem mean to you now, but if you look at the bigger picture, you will see it was necessary. Or different frame, same behavior. Here's a different frame, same behavior.

Here's number B, under 3. Saying mean things means you're a bad person. Bad for how long? Right? Okay, let's look at page 7-3.

Reality strategy on cause or evidence. And what you do is you ask yourself, how do they represent that belief, or how do they or you know it's not true? So saying mean things means you're a bad person. How specifically do you know it's bad? I said them.

So what you're looking for is, you're looking for the reality strategy. You're going directly to the client's reality strategy and challenging that. Number five, you're being late means you don't care about me, model of the world. So we're going to switch referential index or we're going to go for is it true in everyone's model of the world and then the response would be saying mean things means you're a bad person. It may be bad in your model of the world, but in my family, that's how we showed we really cared.

It may be true. It may be a mind read, but it may be true. Okay, number six. The intent on the cause or the evidence. So we look at intent.

That's on page 712, the very last page. And for intent, we're asking, why are you saying this? Or what is the secondary gain? Or what are we trying to get? Saying mean things means you're a bad person.

My intention is not to be bad, but to teach you something. I just read them the way I get them. Number seven, counterexample on cause or evidence. Counterexample is on page 712. Saying mean things means you're a bad person.

We're going to invert the belief, or we're going to say A causes B, not B causes A. So we're going to say, isn't it possible to say mean things and not be a bad person? That's number three, actually. Was there ever a time when A didn't equal B? Is it possible to say mean things and not be a bad person?

Or we could reverse it, or we could say, isn't it possible to be a bad person and not say mean things? So do you all understand how this works? I don't need to go through any further. What I'd like you to do, the most useful, and I'm indebted to Robert Diltz for the slight of mouth examples, which we just went through, and page 713 are some examples for you to look at. In our master practitioner training in Kona in 1995, a bunch of people in this little group here, whatever, they decided they had a name, which was MJMAD, which I have no idea what that means at this point.

And the belief they were going over with, or the actually complex equivalence is NLP is manipulative. And they came up with a bunch of really nice reframes, which you can look at. What I'd like you to do at this point is, because we have a whole hour, that's great, is to get together. How many people are here? Let's look and see.

How many people are here for business? How many people are here for education? Are you going to use this in education? Okay, and how many in therapy? Great, okay, so get into groups of five and generate slight of mouth patterns.

Let me just give you a couple of hints. Some of them are more frequently used than others. Some of the patterns, like apply to self is quite often used. Obviously, we use chunking up and chunking down quite a bit. We use reality strategy maybe or model the world quite a bit.

So those things may just sort of roll off your tongue. The thing to do is just to sort of start with, grab your questions to ask yourself on page 711, and just sort of let them come off your tongue in the same way as you've done other processes before. So we've done other processes before where you just had to come up with something and then notice how it fits. We're going to do it the same way. But it will be most instructional if you pick something in your area of expertise and in the context you're using.

So if you're in selling or in business, find an objection that commonly comes up. If you're in education, find an objection that commonly comes up and generate some patterns. Do the automatic ones first. Do the ones that are easiest to generate. That way, if you're listening to the tapes, why don't you go ahead and stop the tape and do the exercise now.

This is the end of Tape 8, Side B.