# Changing Individual Metaprograms

Let's look at how to change metaprograms. Of course, it's in the book, but I want to run down some considerations that occurred since then. First of all, generally, let's just say generally. Generally, any metaprogram can be changed with hypnosis. Just use hypnosis, figure out a metaphor, use the metaphor, assist the person in changing.

So, for example, page 3-4, frame of reference, how do you know when you're doing a good job? Client has an internal frame of reference, wanted to change it to internal with an external check. What I said was, can you walk down a flight of stairs with 70 steps? Now you're at the bottom. Oh, look over there to the right.

There's the frame of reference switch. Flip it from, flip the switch so it goes down to the next position, which is internal to external check. Walk back up to 70 steps. That's one way. Another way to change them is consider them as strategies and so utilize the strategy.

One of the interventions that I did with, as I mentioned with the engineering firm fellow, was to, with a convincer demonstration, to have him imagine checking the work and how good he'd feel. So that changed his convincer to consistent. So another way is to treat them totally like strategies. And, of course, you could also use anchoring and or parts integration to change metaprograms. These are all generally.

So if I don't mention a specific one of those for a specific metaprogram, then you can use any one of those and notice which one works the best. We're starting on page 3-4. Please listen carefully. Timeline therapy is indicated for direction metaprogram. Get rid of the underlying emotions that underlie the away from.

Reason filter is going to be more like a strategy. So you treat it like a strategy. Or you might also do timeline therapy. Frame of reference I would use hypnosis for, as I mentioned earlier. I don't see any reason to change the convincer rep, but you could, and that would be like a strategy.

That's number four. Number four, strategy. Number five, the convincer demo. When I worked with that guy in the management, mid-level manager, it was more like a strategy installation. Management direction filter is a strategy.

Action filter. Action filter is going to be probably a decision that the person made in the past, so that's timeline therapy. And that's going to be a decision about needing to spend a lot of time. I don't think anybody would ask you to be more reflective, although they might. If they ask you to be more reflective, it might be more like a strategy.

If they ask you to be more proactive or more active, it would be more like timeline therapy. So put next to active, more active, put timeline therapy, more reflective, put strategy. Affiliation filter is going to be, if they wanted to change the affiliation filter, it would be probably values. But it could also be a limiting decision using timeline therapy. Work preference filter will be a decision in the past.

Work preference filter will be a decision in the past. Primary interest filter is a decision. Chunk size filter as well as sensor or intuitor is hierarchy of ideas. Teach the person hierarchy of ideas. Relationship filter is going to be more like a strategy.

And or you could also do some additional timeline therapy with that with regards to the decision that they made. Emotional stress response will probably relate to a strategy. And you may need to get rid of negative emotions in the past, in which case it's also timeline therapy. Time storage metaprogram is timeline. Just switching their timeline if they want to change it.

Modal operator sequence is going to be anchoring. And attention direction is going to be a decision in the past. Some sort of decision and or a strategy with rehearsal. Okay, let's look at page 3-9. Yes, question.

Some of the volunteer work I've done, I noticed with a lot of people that had a criminal past, that often when you listen to them talk, they always say, man, I don't need to be back there doing that anymore. I've got to stay away from these. Everything is get away from. Right. There is no towards because they don't know what their possibilities are.

Right. They don't have the options. But they always talk about, I need to stay away from that. And that's what ends up, they end up going back because it's familiar. No, they end up going back because that's what they're focusing on and because it's familiar.

But they're not asking you for more away froms. They're asking you to create a torrid for them. Because the client that only focuses, see the problem with away froms is not that they're evil or dirty or nasty. They just don't work as well as torrids. And we began this training by saying the problem is you get what you focus on.

So someone who does criminal behavior is in a situation where they are producing behavior which they're focusing on not wanting to do. So if you focus enough on what you don't want to do, you'll eventually create that because your unconscious mind doesn't handle negation. So I really haven't had anybody ask me to increase the away from. I haven't had anybody. I can conceive of a possibility where you might get a business owner who would say to you, I've messed up the last three projects because I didn't adequately estimate what could go wrong.

I've never had that, but I can conceive of that. In which case, you could install an away from strategy, away from, for dealing with that, in which case that would be a strategy installation. But I can't conceive of anybody who would want more negative emotional experiences, at least I hope, unless they were masochistic, in which case, you know, beat me again, it feels so good. I'm the wrong person for them to see, though. I'm not into that.

I apologize for that in advance. Okay, any other questions? What we're going to be sharing with you now is three new meta programs which we've been looking at and they actually deal with communication style and have a lot to do with communication. Donna actually swears by them in relationships. And that's actually what impressed me, and I figured that they were so vital to her in her practice of doing timeline therapy that they probably ought to be included as metaprograms.

And so as Donna Morbido and I talked more and more, the more convinced I became that they definitely should be metaprograms. And so I asked her to assist me by putting together what she looks for and what she says to people. And this work is developed with Donna and adapted from John Kappas, his work. And so let's talk about three different, although Kappas doesn't call this the same thing, let's talk about three different ways of communicating and or handling information that comes to us, and we're looking at page 3.9. And you might want to think about this yourself.

This is a brand new metaprogram, so we don't have a lot of data on it. As you probably have imagined, I have a wealth of experience of eliciting the 16 metaprograms that we've learned so far. And so we don't have as much data over the years of working with students and getting feedback from them. But one thing I'd like to ask you guys to do is to give me some feedback on these metaprograms and how the elicitation went and what value they were to you personally and to your clients. And maybe if you have some insights as we go through this right now, perhaps you'd like to share them.

Okay, so the first thing is information processing style. And the question is, when you need to work through a problem or a challenge in your life, is it absolutely necessary for you to talk about it with someone else or think about it first? The word absolutely necessary is important in this particular context. And so some people will need to talk about it with someone else and we'll call them external information processors. And some folks will need to think about it by themselves first.

You may also get both, someone who needs to think about it and then needs to talk. But primarily what we're looking for is whether or not the processing is going to need to be internal or external. One of the things about these three, these three metaprograms is that there's a big range of, there's a large, like the Myers-Briggs, I would say there's, there may be almost as much of a range. So some people may be really, really needing to process way internal and don't ever talk. Some people may need to process a little bit and then talk.

And some people may need to always talk and never process internally. So there's a great big range between internal and external. It's not black or white. It's not on and off, but we're assuming that there's probably going to be as much range of it as the Myers-Briggs. So if the person says I need to talk about it with someone else, obviously they're going to be external, and if they need to think about it by themselves first, they'll be internal.

And you could get both, and you may also want to know the order and sequence of that. You may also want to know the order and sequence of whether they're internal, whether they have to talk first and then process it themselves, or whether they have to process it themselves and then talk. Let me go through the three of them, then I'm going to talk about consequences. And as you hear these questions, you may want to ask yourself that question, and then I want to do a group sort of, see if we can get some percentages. But let's look at the next question and how to evaluate it.

If someone you knew quite well said to you, I'm thirsty, would you find the comment interesting but probably do nothing about it? Or would you feel really compelled to do something about it? Someone who would find the comment interesting but do nothing about it probably is a literal listener. And the literal listener would only respond to a request for, can you get me a glass of water? Whereas the inferential listener would be compelled or feel like they had to do something about it.

Now, the inferential listener might not actually do something about it, but the inferential listener will feel like they should, or like they, like, is that, they feel like they should, or they might, so they might not, they might not actually act on it, but they'd be sitting there going, we're going to do something about this, right? Okay, so that's listening style. And then there's speaking style, and what we're suggesting at this point is you ask the listening style first before the speaking style, and then we're suggesting you ask the speaking style. So the speaking style is if you felt someone around you was not performing as well as they should, would you come to the point and tell them directly, or would you hint, imply, and give them clues? The person who would come to the point and tell them directly, obviously, is literal.

The hint, imply, and give them clues is inferential. There's a secondary question which I didn't put on here which may work equally as well, and that's the non-memorandum of the listening style for the glass of water. So you might also want to try that one on and see how that works. The question would be, and this is for speaking style, but it's similar to the one I'm thirsty. If you were with someone you knew quite well and you were thirsty, would you ask them to get you a drink or would you tell them I'm thirsty and expect that they would get you a drink?

Okay, so let's go through, and then why don't you just sort of evaluate who you are on this. Let's go through all three of them, and I'll ask you guys the question, and then I want to talk a little bit about consequences. Oh, well, I'll ask you the question, we'll see a show of hands, and then I want to talk about consequences. Okay, you guys ready? Okay,, when you need to work through a problem or challenge in your life, is it absolutely necessary for you to talk about it with someone else or to think about it by yourself first?

Okay. How many people... You all ready? Can you answer the question? Okay.

How many people need to talk about it with someone else in the process of processing it? First. Okay. How many people need to think about it by yourself first? Ah, that's a real high percentage.

I did not expect that. Yeah. Hold on. How many people would need... Let me just get the rest of it out.

How many people who raised their hand earlier would need also the other one too? Or how many people, whoever raised your hand, would need to do the other one too? So in other words, you'd need to talk to someone else and think about it. How many people would need to do both? Yeah, need is the primary word there.

We've done this with our large group of research in designing this question. Great, so can you give me percentages? People need to talk about it as like, what, 10%? And then 90%? Think about it.

And then what percentage both? 50% both. Okay, the question may not be dichotomous enough, but we'll leave it at that. I would prefer to have more of a broader range. Okay, let's talk about consequences. Let's talk about consequences of this.

The person who processes information externally is more like an extrovert. The person who processes information internally is more like an introvert in terms of information processing. Although there's no direct correlation between introvert and extrovert as we've already seen based on the, the percentage of introvert and extrovert in the room was 45 extrovert, 55 introvert, and we virtually have 10% external processing and 90% internal processing. So there's no necessary correlation between those two. But in terms of how you process information, you're more internal or more external.

Interestingly enough, your processing style, according to Kappas, comes from your secondary parent, who is dad. Nothing sexist intended. Your primary parent's mom, your secondary parent's dad, and or someone who acted like dad. So you probably have the same processing style as Dad did, unless you have reacted to Dad and his style, in which case you might have flipped and taken the opposite tact or taken the opposite approach to communication. And so why don't you think about, let's just check percentages.

So how does that sit for you? Is that correct? For how many people is that not correct in that either you are like dad or you have reacted to dad and took the opposite? Is there anyone for whom that's not true? Okay, how many people are like dad?

This is good. These are good little, what's your percentage? 70%. Okay, and how many people are not like, well, obviously, 30% are not like dad. Oh, so the people that are not like dad, you have reacted, right?. Ab-reacted may be too strong a term.

It's the best one I can come up with right now. You mismatched. All right, ab-reacted, okay. People like ab-reacted. Okay, got it.

Dad, pay attention. All right. Interestingly enough, one of the theories is that we seek balance by getting into a relationship with someone who's the opposite of what we are. So how many people are in relationship with someone who processes information the exact opposite of the way you process or have been in the past in relationship, as you think about it, with someone who processes information exactly the opposite from the way you do? How many people are either in relationship now with someone who's the opposite or have been in relationship in the past with someone who's the opposite? 45%.

Okay, please put your hands down. Now, how many people find that that last statement is not true? 12, okay. So the rest of the folks don't know or aren't evaluating relationship in that way. Okay. So that's probably a pretty good bet.

In terms of working with couples, it's probably a pretty good bet that this would be a reasonable thing to say to couples. I'm not sure if you choose your boss or if you choose your coworkers for the same reason, but it would be an interesting thought, and if you guys could give me feedback about that, that would be great. Let's go on to listening style. So if someone you knew quite, so let's do this, you know, pretend I'm asking you the question. So if someone you knew quite well said to you, I'm thirsty, would you find the comment interesting but probably do nothing about it, or would you feel really compelled to do something about it?

How many people would find the comment interesting but probably do nothing about it? It doesn't matter where you're at, right? It doesn't matter where you're at. By the way, there's absolutely no judgment on these. No, there really isn't.

I'm going to tell you, you guys who just raised your hand are what we call literal listeners. And for you who are literal listeners, you've got a much less burden than the rest of the people who are inferential listeners. I'm going to tell you right now. What was the percentage, Donna? 20%. How many people are inferential listeners? 70%.

What is that? 100%? 90%. Okay, so 10% don't know or are both. Joe, you're both. So, you'd be a choice. Okay.

But if I said to you, I'm thirsty, would you be looking for something to do or would you understand that I wanted you? Do you get me a a glass of water? So if you would ask me, then you're an inferential listener. Okay, that's some additional clarification. If you would ask me, you're an inferential listener.

If you wouldn't notice... Yes. Okay, I like the word compelled. Let me tell you, I gotta tell you, this is my own personal experience. My mom's 85, bless her heart, and she shouldn't have to do anything.

I'll sit in the living room with her. In the past, I've sat in the living room with her, and she'll sit next to me and she'll go, I'm so thirsty, and I'm like this. Up to the fridge, get her a Diet Coke. I don't have any choice. It's like, boom.

If CNN, I'm going, oh, I'm trying to get the news here, mom. Can I get you a, oh, she said, it's all right. Like, I'll be thirsty till I dry up and blow away. I am such an inferential listener, it's like, ah! See, the inferential listener, before they take NLP, mind reads and hallucinates what other people are saying.

Mind reads and hallucinates. And once they learn NLP, what they learn is how to ask questions to get more literal information, so they do less mind reading. And they've actually, one of the neat things about metamodel and presuppositions is, is that it teaches you how to not, you can still be inferential, but it teaches you how to ground your inferentiality in literalness, or at least in the structure of the process. One of the things that an inferential listener needs to learn, here, check this out. Now imagine somebody coming up, an information processing person, coming up to an inferential listener and the external information processor has to talk about it.

So they come up to the inferential listener and they go, by the way, and the inferential listener goes, I wonder what they want from me. Why is he saying this? What does he want? And so the inferential listener needs to learn to ask, are you just venting, or do you want me to do something about this? Right?

So that's real useful, it seems to me, probably in business and also in relationships. Let's talk about speaking style. Here, let's do this together. If you felt that someone around you was not performing as well as they should, would you come to the point and tell them directly, or would you hint, imply, and give them clues? And if you're taking this in a business context, if you felt someone around you in business was not performing as well as they could.

So how many people would come to the point and tell them directly? Could you keep your hands up nice and high? We're going to do a count. And Terry says, in the feedback sandwich, of course. Thanks, Terry. 56.

And how many people would hint, imply, and give them clues? Hint, imply, and give them clues. 32%. Okay. You get your listening and speaking style from your primary parent, mom. Listening and speaking style from mom.

And it's either the same unless you abreact, in which case it could be different. So as it says on the bottom of your page here with the notes, a literal listener may not know when an inferential speaker compliments them. Let me ask you guys a question before I go on with the rest of these notes here. How many people think they listen and speak the way your mom did? Listen and speak the way your mom did? 48.

How many people think you, Eb, reacted to the way your mom spoke and so you speak and listen differently? Did Eb react? Okay, and then how many people, put your hands down, thank you, how many people did not find either of those statements true? That's about 16%, that's still 85. 16% did not find them true, so that's still 85% accuracy, which isn't too bad. Okay, so how many people, let's take listening and speaking separately.

How many people listen like your mom? What percentage is that? 54%. Okay, thank you. Put your hands down. How many people have reacted to the way your mom listened and so listened differently? 24%.

And then put your hands down. Thank you. How many people found neither of those statements true? 8%. So, if it doesn't add up, then the rest of the people don't know. Right?

Okay, and speaking style. How many people speak the same way your mom did with regards to literal or inferential? That's 54. 54%. Okay, thank you. How many people have reacted to the way your mom spoke so you speak differently? 26%.

Okay, thank you. Put your hands down. How many people found neither of those statements true? 8%, right. Because the rest of the people don't know. Okay, so a literal listener may not know when an inferential speaker compliments them.

So the one thing a literal listener needs to do is to ask. And the other thing the inferential speaker needs to do is to say to the literal listener, hey, and be really direct, hey, you're looking good, or something like that. Now, the most fun one is imagine an inferential listener, and anybody walks up to them, they can think that any question is a request for action, which puts a great burden on the inferential listener. So the inferential listener needs to learn how to ask, hey, do you want me to do something or are we just talking? Let's see, two more things.

The internal processor has to go inside and sometimes doesn't know when something's going on in his or her environment until they go inside. So the person who processes information internally might have something going on with them in the relationship or in the business, but they won't know it until they have a chance to sit down and think about it. But an external processor may notice the internal processor having stuff. And so the external processor might say, what's up? And the internal processor would say, nothing.

And the external processor says, I know there's something up. And the external processor may feel rejected if the internal processor is not talking to the external processor about what the internal processor has going on. The room is rumbling. People are going, yeah, I got that. Son of a gun.

So the external processor might be going, hey, something's going on. And the internal processor might not know it for days. Or check this out. Like, here's an example. This is a real example.

The internal processor comes home and has had a rough day at work. And the external processor says, what's up? And the internal processor says, nothing. Then the internal processor goes inside and processes something for 45 minutes, handles it inside himself or herself, and then is just fine. And the external processor feels totally left out of it, but the internal processors handle it totally and has nothing to say.

So when the external processor says what was up earlier, the internal processor says, I handled it. There's nothing up. Right? So the external processor feels unneeded, left out. So it's a really important metaprogram for relationships.

It's also important in business. Now let's take questions and comments. In regards to speaking style, with this question I find that I'm an inferential speaker. It was awfully direct of you to say that. Why, thank you.

But when it's something that I want, using the question that you put before the non-minor image reverse of the listening style, then I'm a literal speaker. I ask for exactly what I want because of what I want. So you come out two different ways based on two different questions? Yeah. What is it away from?

So if it's got to do with somebody's emotions, their internal representation, then I'll beat around the bush trying to find a way that seems to fit well with them from the way I'm seeing it. But if it's something external which I want, which isn't going to bother about a feeling, then boom, I'll just ask for his... Like if I want a drink, I'll say I want a drink. I'm not thirsty. So he has a, so the issue is with regards to flanks.

Is that part of it? I'll be part of it. We'll work that out. Well, it's certainly going to be context dependent, but also dependent upon whether or not you're dealing with emotion, which has to do with, yeah. Okay, Joe.

I answered B first, but... You answered internal. Yeah, internal, but from your description of, you know, the external processor is asking if anything's wrong and the internal says nothing, I would have to change that to external. It was a misunderstanding of, think about it yourself first, I can't conceive of a situation where a person doesn't realize there's a problem, and that to me is thinking about it, even though it's just momentary. Perhaps the worry to solve it, attempt to solve it inside yourself first.

Now, I don't do that. Yeah, you need to know that some internals, some internals will not know there's something up until they have a chance to think about it. Even though something could be up, they may come to a realization that something's up as many days later as three or four days after they've had a chance to think about it. And then the more they think about it internally, the more upset they might get until they have to speak about it. But if they're inferential, they might beat around the bush and not speak about it directly and say, well, you know...

So what you're saying is they have to think about it first to even realize it's a problem. The internal processor will have to think about it first to even get that there's a problem. Now, the lag time between the event and thinking about it may be instantaneous for some internal processors or may take up to a number of days. I mean, I'm an internal processor. And when this hotel told us that we were not coming back here next June and July because they had booked a convention right in the middle.

Now, we've been here for eight years. And they booked a convention right in the middle of our practitioner and master practitioner training next June and July. And at first I went, okay, fine, we'll go somewhere else. But the more I thought about it, the more upset I got to the point where I, you know, I kind of think, well, geez, they ought to do something for us because that's really, we really got tweaked here. I mean, we've been one of their largest customers by their own accord, by their own admission, for eight years.

And we've been here exactly at the same time with two or three days leeway. So I'm sitting here going, yeah, and the more I think about it, the more upset I get. So that's an internal processor. And I haven't said anything to anybody at the hotel about it. Okay, now, yeah, that's...

Not yet, anyway. Well, Donna, yeah, no, Donna will. See, Donna will. Donna will. No, but when I go over the top, I will get direct.

I will get direct. But I'm not over the top yet. Yes, Yvonne. I find the absolute first thing I have to do is go away and think about it by myself. Right.

But then it's absolutely necessary for me to talk about it with someone else. So you'd be both? So I'm both. And I also find when I see someone else having a problem, I've absolutely got to know what's the problem. And if they say nothing, I feel left out.

So you're probably external. You're probably external because you do have to talk to them, absolutely. And you notice them. Yeah, remember there's a scale, a big scale. If it was like the Myers-Briggs, it would be 0 to 65 on each side.

So you're an external. Okay. Yes, Lauren. Okay. Number 18.

In this day and age, if somebody said, I'm thirsty, and somebody else ran to get them a drink, it would be considered enabling or dysfunctional. Thank you very much. I'm going to tell my mother that next week. She's 85, you know. And I'll say, Lauren told me you're going to get your own damn drink.

An equity. All things being equal. If you're a child or you're very old. I'm willing to be dysfunctional, Lauren. I get it.

If you're also in my home, I would consider that... I'm an influential listener. I understand what you're saying. Okay. If you're in my home, I would consider it a direct request.

If we were both outside and we were both equal capacity, I would think, so, fine. You're thirsty. Yeah. So I think... So it's context dependent.

Yeah, that's what I was saying, and also just maybe a slightly different question might do it better. We're working on the questions, I promise. This is the first draft here. A question for Donna. In a relationship, for a good relationship, is opposite or the same the best predictor of a good relationship?

Whoa. Is different or the same the best predictor of a good relationship? You know what Carl Jung said? Carl Jung said we most often attract a person that's opposite to us to gain balance. There's a joke that says that if both of you are exactly the same, one of you is redundant.

Ooh. Well, Sun likes that. Sun says it's true. It's not a joke. Yeah.

Okay. I see the picture of an inferential speaker and inferential listener. One talking to the other, neither one understanding each other. No, the inferential listener and the inferential speaker understand each other very well. They may be hallucinating wildly.

They may be mind-reading totally. But they're certain they understand that each of them wants something from the other. I'm enough of one myself, and my wife is another one. And I know that sometimes it's perfect, but other times it goes totally haywire. I'm with you.

Totally enough. And I'm going to tell you what, it's definite. Okay. Any other comments? Fabulous.