# Focus, Metaphors, Presuppositions Ofnlp 

So where are we? Let's go back and review for a second. What you focus on determines the results. What you believe is real is real. And if you can change your reality, you'll actually change, if you can change your reality, you'll actually change the results that happen in your life.

If you change your beliefs about reality, you'll actually make the changes. If you change your thinking, you can actually change just about everything that goes on in your universe. So first of all, it's a matter of focus. First of all, it's a matter of focus. Milton Erickson was very, very big on focus.

He was very, very big on focus. He said, you can tune your awareness and you can move it in different ways and in different directions. And there was a client that came in with tinnitus. You know, tinnitus is like ringing in the ears, right? And the client came in with tinnitus and he said, just tune your awareness.

Just allow your awareness to be... He said, because if you've proven you can have sounds in your head, why not play a good tune? Why not play a happy tune? And there was a guy who came in right after that who had a wooden leg named John. And John was complaining about having phantom leg pain in the leg where there's no leg.

Imagine that. Imagine having phantom leg pain in the leg where there's no leg. And Erickson said if you can have any feelings at all in your leg where there's no leg, you can have good feelings. That clearly is not just focus, but also cause and effect, isn't it? So when the schizophrenic client comes into NLP and says, I'm hallucinating, and the question is, of course, what are you hallucinating?

And the client says, well, I'm hallucinating that little girl on Little House on the Prairie coming down off the TV set and saying nasty things to me. The response is, couldn't you pick a better channel? Who's in charge? The question is, who's in charge? So I've got to tell you guys a story.

Can I tell you a story? Can I tell you a story? This August I went and, this last August I went and did a sweat lodge in California with Daniel, who's a good friend of mine, and Jane and some other folks. And I don't know if you've ever done a sweat lodge, but it was pretty hot. Now, if you can imagine this, and I don't know if you've ever had, like, claustrophobia.

Fortunately, I didn't, but this would bring it out in you. I'm going to tell you what. So they stick you in this inipi, which is kind of like a tent, but it's got, like, heavy blankets all over it. And the tent's like, I don't know, it's not much bigger than maybe this big across or twice as big as this, which would be maybe three to six feet or nine feet across. And it's a little longer, but in the center there's this great big hole.

There's a great big hole in the ground. I'm looking at the hole in the ground going, whoa, that's pretty cool. And like, we all get inside there and then the guy who's in charge of the thing says, bring in the first set of rocks. And so they brought out of this fire rocks that were boulders. I mean, they were like mammoth boulders, this big, maybe two feet in diameter.

And they were glowing red. And so they stuck these in this pit in the middle. They brought in eight rocks the first time and stuck them in the pit in the middle. And then they closed the door. And it was dark in there.

It was nighttime. It was dark. It was really dark. And what we could see is the lava rocks. And then we went around in a circle, and the first time around, we...

I don't know what we did. We talked. And the first time around, we talked about what we were thankful for. And I'm a man of brevity. I just want you to know.

Because I figure, hell, I'm getting out of here quick. I'm not going to say much. So I said a few things. We go around the circle. This guy over here, he's like right over here.

He's a Native American guy, and this guy could write a book. So it's hot. I'm telling you what, it's hot. And every time somebody said something good, the head dude poured a little water on the rocks. He said, that's good.

And he poured some water and it go, and the steam had come up. I don't think it was much more than 15 or 20 minutes when I was hotter than I'd ever been. And I've been in Phoenix in the summer. So I just want you to know that was, this is hotter than Africa. I'll tell you what.

Thanks to, I mean, this is hot. And I mean, it's really hot, and I'm sweating, and it's getting hotter and hotter, and we're going around the circle talking, and everybody's like, you know, okay, yeah, and I'm thankful for this, and I'm thankful for that, and it's great, and I'm going, whoa, this is pretty hot. Jeez, and I start dripping, and the sweat starts rolling off my body, and it's getting really hot. And he goes, when we get all done, he goes, that's the first door. I go, oh, cool, that's the first door.

It's really hot. It's the hottest I've ever been. I don't think I've ever been this hot. And he says, now we're going to talk about fear. He says, now we're going to talk about our fears.

And I go, okay, that's cool. I can talk about my fears. I haven't got many. I'm a man of brevity. I'm going to say a few words.

Because it's getting hotter and hotter. I'll tell you what, it's getting so hot that I couldn't believe it. It's getting really hot. No, it got really hot. I mean, the rocks are glowing red, and he's pouring water on the thing, and then we get around to the Native American guy over here, and he starts talking an encyclopedia of what he's afraid of.

I said, I'm glad I cleared my fear, because I didn't have much to say, but this guy's telling everything I ever had, and everything I ever thought of, and everything anybody else ever had, and he's going through the whole list. And then my whole body is wet. My whole body is totally soaked. My whole body is soaked. And all of a sudden, I hear the beating of my pulse in my temples.

It was so hot. And I said, this is really intense, man. This is really hot. And then the native guy got done, and people were talking around the corner, and he got around, and he goes, okay, we're done. He says, flip up the door, and I went far out, man.

That was a great, you know, that was a great sweat lodge. It was really good. It was the best. To myself, I'm saying this. Of course, everybody's still sitting there, and I'm going, they're still sitting here.

But boy, that cool air coming in from the door, I thought, man, I made it. That was a great Sweat Lodge. I'm glad we did. He goes, bring in eight more rocks. Bring in eight more rocks.

I'm totally soaked. The ground beneath me is wet. I gave off every glass of water I had today and yesterday. I'm sitting there sweating. That was hotter than I'd ever been.

And he's bringing in eight more rocks. And these are big boulders, two feet down, and they're glowing red. And they bring him in. And he says, close the door. Oh, no.

And we start talking about healing other people. I've healed a lot of people in my life. I haven't really. I'm just a tour guide. But there's a lot of people that need to be healed.

And I'm thankful for it. But I'm a man of brevity. I said as little as I could. But at some point, as we got around the circle, as the Native American guy was talking, I think he had a lot of people in his life. Because he had a little mom and a cat and his aunt and uncle.

Oh, man. And I said to myself, I'm going to die. I am going to die. I'm going to die right here in the middle of Southern California, just off of Newport Beach. I'm going to die.

I'm going to be dead. I'm going to die. And I could hear the sound of the blood pulsing in my veins. And I said, this is it. This is it.

I'm really going to go. I'm totally, and I'm here, and then, I said, there can't be more than three doors now, can there? Were there? And he pours on some more water, and he goes around, and then he says, and we're going around again for the fourth door, which is what? Prayers.

Yeah, I was ready to pray, I'll tell you what. I was ready to pray. Now, I'll tell you what. The blood is pulsing in my head. I've never been so hot.

My entire body is hotter than it's ever been. And I'll tell you what. The sweat is rolling off my body now. It's not just little bits of sweat. It's like it's raining.

And my whole, every bit of my being is wholly wet. The ground underneath me is wet. I'm supplied, I'm not slipping down out of the tent. I need to be there because it's so wet underneath me, but there was rugs underneath me. And then I remembered something that Daniel said, and Daniel said, he said, if you get too hot, get down on the ground.

Now listen, I want you to know that I had, it was okay, it was okay if I pulled the door, because you could say, any of us could have said, open the door, it's too hot, we want to get out. But I wasn't going to say that. No way, man. I'm not going to say that. I have some pride left.

I mean, I thought, I know I'm going to die, I know I'm dead, but I figured if I die, if I die this way, I surely am going to go to heaven. If my brain explodes, I'm all the way going to heaven because this is a good thing to do. And I'm a man of brevity. So I sat up when I did my last little talk and I put my you know, I was there for so long, I swore I was going to die. I swore I was going to die.

I knew I was going to die. And then all of a sudden, I tuned in to the earth element. And when I reached back and pulled up something that I didn't think I had, something shifted inside of me. Something totally shifted inside of me, and all of a sudden I just stepped right into the coolness. I've got to tell you another story.

Because in the middle of Huna, this last time, we walked across a volcano. And we do that every Huna. I've probably walked across a volcano 15 times. And each time I had a nice experience. During the Huna training, we actually walked down into the crater of a live volcano, walked across a volcano.

But this time, and you know, one of the interesting things is when you're doing stuff like this, you never know. You never know what's going to happen. So this time, this time we actually, this time we actually walked in to the park. We actually drove into the park, but all got together, walked up to the place where we usually start on the wall. And I usually talk a little bit.

The sky was clear. There was some rain over there. It looked a little bit, but the sky was pretty clear, so we were ready to go. And we were all ready to go, and I do the little introductory talk and a little Hawaiian chant, and we start down the hill and it starts raining. Just kind of a little heavier than a sprinkle.

I think it was a little heavier than a sprinkle anyway. It started drizzling, yeah, drizzling. And then it got a little heavier and a little heavier, a little heavier. And by the time we were down to the point where we actually couldn't walk back, it started pouring. And I don't mean just regular drops.

I mean, have you ever seen those big drops that are kind of like when they splash on the ground, they look like you can see the whole splash? And it started raining like that. And it rained. And it rained. And we walked down into the volcano, and at some point, we're in the volcano, and at some point, we stopped.

And I went back, and there were like, I don't know how many people were there, 50? 50 people, maybe? 50? And at some point, I said, we better check and see if everybody wants to go. So I walked back up, and I said, listen, to each person, I said, we're getting a cleansing, and you don't have to go. We'll go back if anybody wants to go back. But to a person, each one of the people said, we're going to go for it.

To a person, each one said, we're going to go for it. And you know, we hike, and all the while I'm going, it's going to stop raining. I know it's going to stop raining. This is Hawaii. This is the big island.

It never rains like this for continuous, there's not that much rain in the sky. And we get down to the bottom of the crater where we normally do a chant and walk across the flat part of the crater where we've done it probably 15 times already and where the astronauts train for the moon landing because it most closely resembles the surface of the moon. And it looks all the same and we're down there and the rain is raining so hard, by the way, I've got to stick my hand up on my eyes and hold it down. It reminded me of the amount of water that I got in the sweat lodge, which is probably why I'm telling you this story. And the rain is like dripping so much that I can't even look out in front of me unless I take my hand and put it right on the top of my head to stop the rain from coming in my eyes.

And it still continued to rain. As we started to walk across the crater, as we started to walk across the crater, I said, I know it's going to stop raining. It's got to. And, you know, we walked all the way across the crater to the point where I don't think I've ever been as cold. Not from cold, but from wet.

And at that point, I had to reach down inside, because we're going across the crater. And it's kind of tricky to know where you're going because the trail is marked by stones just piled up on top of each other. And so I'm holding the thing, holding my hand over my eyes, trying to figure out where we're going. And at some point, I realized that my feet were just getting a little numb. And I thought, because normally we stop and let people rest, and I thought, is this possibly the beginnings of hypothermia?

It's true. And at that point, I realized I had to reach down inside and pull up something that I didn't know that I had. I had to literally reach down inside and pull up something that I didn't know that I had. And put that on in order to keep going. So let me tell you about the Zurich Axioms.

Zurich Axioms is a book. It's about investing. It's a book about investing. But it's not really about investing. To me, it's about life.

And one of the aphorisms in the Zurich Axioms, I don't even have, it was not published in the U.S., it was published in Switzerland, but it was published in English. One of the aphorisms about the Zurich Axioms says, if you're not scared shitless at least once a day, you're not investing enough. If you're not scared shitless at least once a day, you're not investing enough. So I want you to know that during this training, there are going to be times when you're going to have to reach back inside and pull out something that you didn't know you had. I hope it happens soon.

Because I'll tell you what, when it happens to me, it's like totally awesome. When it happens to me and I have to reach down inside and pull up something, it's like you sit there, you know, the rain's got to stop. When you reach back inside and pull that up, it'll totally transform your life. So think of investing whatever it is you're investing. I know you've invested time and energy to be here, and I appreciate that.

And I want you to know that our intention is to invest everything in you in this training so that you get your outcome. And I want you to invest the same level of investment. As you think about it, what it is that you're investing. Consider this, and I think this is also part of what is important to us in this training. There's a lot of different ways to teach NLP.

There's a lot of different ways to teach NLP, and this is one of them. There's a, there's a saying in, in Huna that we usually start off all of our Huna trainings with, which is, which you don't need to write down. What that means is, think not that the only way to teach this is in your school. So there's a lot of different ways to learn NLP, and we'll be emphasizing our own way of NLP. Those of you, I know there are some of you who study with other people, and you may experience a different emphasis, and there are some people you know who may have different emphases.

Keep in mind that there's lots of different lots of different ways to teach this and, and that each of you who have studied NLP before come to it from your own angle. This is our angle in terms of our, this is sort of our angle in terms of the presuppositions. This is sort of the way, this is sort of the way we look at it. This is sort of the way I look at it, personally. Now, we also have some NLP presuppositions, so let's look at page 1-5.

What's your favorite? What's the most important NLP presupposition to you? What's your favorite presupposition? Yeah. Right.

Good. There's no such thing as failure, only feedback. Number 11 on page 15. There's no failure, there's only feedback. That's important.

You're going to be receiving some feedback afterwards. In the next two weeks, you'll be receiving some feedback. And the feedback that you receive is designed to best assist you in improving what it is that you're going to be doing. So take it that way. One of the things that has occurred to me is, and it's kind of weird, the better you get, the harder it is to get high-quality feedback.

So whenever I get feedback, I really welcome it. Consider that the folks here who are giving you feedback are here to give you feedback to improve yourself and to improve how you're doing NLP. And also consider that they're here to support you. So the feedback you get, I expect, will be really high-quality feedback in terms of how to improve your performance and how to be able to do the NLP techniques flawlessly. What's another favorite of yours?

Yeah. Yeah, the law of requisite variety, which is number 10, which says the system or the person with the most flexibility of behavior will end up controlling the system. See, here's the deal. Can I tell you this? If there's a behavior in therapy that you can't produce, or if you're unwilling to produce all different kinds of behavior, then eventually you're going to run into somebody who's more flexible than you are.

Eventually you're going to run into somebody that's more flexible than you are. Now the only reason, it's like if you have a kid, like the kid comes in and he throws, like he's going to throw a tantrum, right? The only reason why you wouldn't outdo him or her is because you think, well, how would it look if I did that? See, you wouldn't just get right down on the ground and do the same thing. You could.

You'd get tangled up in your microphone. But it's possible that if you were willing to produce behavior way beyond what your client thought or whatever you thought was possible, that you'd end up having the requisite variety of behavior that would be able to produce the kind of results you wanted to produce. So strive and be willing to produce any kind of behavior at all that will support your client. That's the important part. Strive to expand your willingness to do whatever it takes in terms of producing behavior, which is kind of like reaching back down in and finding something.

What else? Yeah. Meaning of communication is the response you get. Number two. I don't know.

When I took my master's degree in communication from Syracuse University, we learned that communication was 50-50. I remember the professor even drew a diagram on the board. He said, 50%, 50%. Now, personally, at this point, I think that's kind of disempowering, because if I only have 50% investment in the results that I get, then how can I improve myself at 100%? The interesting thing about this particular presupposition is it's terribly empowering for the NLP master practitioner.

It's really empowering for you as a master practitioner because what it says is, as you look out at your client and you look at the response you get, then that's the meaning of your communication. Whoa! Because that totally empowers you. It totally empowers you to create the kind of response you want because what it says is if you have the requisite variety of behavior available to you, it essentially says you can change your behavior and produce any kind of results you want. That's exciting.

That's exciting. The meaning of communication and response you get is like a totally empowering presupposition. A totally empowering assumption. It's something that really empowers you because you're in charge then. It puts you totally in charge of the response you get.

And so if I were to label that diagram today of 50-50, I'd label it 100-100. I would say that each person in the interaction of communication is 100% responsible for creating the kind of result that you want to create. Assuming you know your outcome, that you take action, that you're aware, you have some sort of sensory acuity of what's going on, that you actually are changing your behavior until you get the kind of response you want and that you're acting from a physiology and psychology of excellence. Okay. What's another favorite presupposition?

Yeah. There's a bunch of them that talk about that. Number eight, people have all the ability that they need to succeed. There are no unresourceful people, only unresourceful states. Actually, five, six, and eight talk about people and their ability.

Number five, people are only doing the best with the resources they have available, which is behaviors geared toward adaptation and present behavior is the best choice. Number six, whatever you think you are, you're always more than that, which includes the most important information about a person is that person's behavior, but a person's behavior is not who they are. And number eight, people have all the resources they need to see. There are no unresourceful people, only unresourceful states. Erickson was very big on this.

Erickson was very big on this, that he would actually go back and assist people in picking up resources that they had in the past that they were unaware of or... Because he said everybody in the past must have had a time when they had resources for something. And so through hypnosis he would assist them in doing that. What else? What's another favorite?

Yeah. Respect for the other person's model of the world. Yeah, that's a good presupposition. It doesn't mean, by the way, that we have to, that means we have to respect it. It doesn't mean we have to accept it.

I mean, it doesn't mean we have to accept it as being cast in stone. What it says is if you respect the person's model of the world, then, of course, you'll enter into that model of the world in the process of assisting them for creating change. That you'll actually enter into the model of the world in the process of assisting them creating change. There are many, many different kinds of ways or models of the world, or many different directions or angles of viewing models of the world. So if a client comes to you and asks you to do something that you've never thought of, for example, I had one client come to me, this was a long, long time ago, before I'd ever thought of doing depossession.

The client came to me and said, I'm possessed, what do you think? I said, I think you're in the right place. So I'd like to talk to the part of you that, which hand would that part like to come out and stand on, the right or the left? So there are lots of different ways of viewing models of the world. In fact, in 1500 AD, all dis-ease was thought to be spirit possession.

I don't know if you know that. In medicine, all dis-ease was thought to be spirit possession. Today we have a name for it. It's called parts integration. So clearly we would respect the client's model of the world.

We wouldn't go, oh, that's nuts. Nobody's possessed anymore. What we would do is we'd respect the model of the world and utilize it and assist the client in creating the change through that. Okay, what other favorites do you have? Yeah.

Whoa. I'm in charge of my mind and therefore my results. Absolutely. So, of course, the question that comes up from my point of view is, especially with the issue of cause and effect, the client says, you know, I can't imagine anybody liking me. I say, why would you do that?

It's an interesting question. It's an interesting question. Like, why would you choose to think that way? Which is essentially a cause and effect question. Yeah.

Any other favorites? That's good. All procedures should increase wholeness and choice. The notion of all procedures increasing wholeness, by the way, is a presupposition which is unique to our little branch of NLP. there are some folks in NLP who are into actually having more parts. Although personally I disagree with this notion, I think that it's important to understand that it's possible to have differences of opinion and still have a field of NLP.

So there are some folks who actually install parts for various things and various processes. Personally, I'm kind of opposed to that because I think the more parts we have, the more the chances for conflict occur, the more there are chances for conflict, I'm, I'm convinced that I want to assist a person in achieving greater wholeness. And I think I also want to assist a person in achieving greater choices. We don't want to do a process that will reduce choice. And in my opinion, we don't want to do a process that reduce wholeness.

I think those are important. This is the end of Tape 2, Side B.