# Evaluating The Hierarchy, Values Utilization

Welcome back. What questions do you have? Yes, Murray. We can change these, right? Are you worried?

No, they're cast in stone, Murray. They're going to stay with you for the next 16 lifetimes. Just kidding, just kidding. We can change them, yes, for sure. We can change our values, but one thing is just because your values are the way they are, one of my is, if it ain't broke, don't fix it, okay?

The next thing, we have to find something else out about the values. So, you guys, what we did was we did, first thing we did was, there's just a general elicitation, what's important to you. Second thing we did was for motivation strategy. Third thing we got was the stay-go loop, right? Which was the threshold value.

So all these present, what would have to happen, such as it would cause you to stay, all these being present, plus this one, what would happen, it would cause you to leave. And you go back and forth, and you loop on that until you get no new words, which is what we did with sun, but we didn't get any new words. Okay, there's now, there are five things that we can do to assess, and by the way, I would prefer that you do this, Murray, a little more orderly and sequentially rather than going, oh, I hate these values, or whatever. Or if the client says that. Oh, you just want to change the order?

Oh, great, okay. In fact, this is NLP, right? We're going to do that. All right, so let's look at page 324, and I'm looking at slide number 146. Chapter 3, page 24, or slide number 146.

But for those of you that are interested, the slide's the same as the page number. All right. Okay, so the first thing we want to look at, from my point of view, is the number one value. And is the number one value abstract? Is it very abstract, or is it, it doesn't have to be the most abstract necessarily, but it shouldn't be specific.

Have you ever met anyone who had money as their number one value? Yes. They're not really a lot of fun to be with. The reason is, is because money is, is not an abstract value. It's a pretty specific value.

And some people might say, well, how could money be a value? Money is a nominalization. It's actually a nominalization of work, in my opinion. And it's a nominalization of work because it represents work, and that beats chickens. Chickens are harder to carry in your pocket.

They don't fold very well. And if you keep too many of them in your pocket, your pocket begins to stink. If you've ever been around a chicken, you know what I mean. Yeah. That's why they call it chicken.

Yeah, that's it. Okay. So, the first thing is, logical level of abstraction, the first value should be abstract. It doesn't have to be the most abstract, but it should be more abstract than many values. And the second thing is, are other values a subset of this higher value?

That's the first question you'd want to ask yourself. The second one you might want to look at is syntax. Does this value support the actualization of the next higher value? So you'd start from the bottom of that. The next thing we want to look at is the motivation direction.

And we want to look at, is the value itself, is the client telling us what they want or what they don't want? And we're going to look for negations, comparative deletions, and modal operators of necessity if they're present. Then we'll look at toward-toward conflicts. We'll look at simultaneous incongruity. And we look at toward-and-away conflicts. we'll look at sequential incongruity.

And we may also look at away from, away from conflicts. We may also look at away from, away from conflicts, which can give us both sequential and simultaneous incongruity. So these are the things that we want to look at, and my personal preference is to look at 3, 4, 5, and 6 to begin with. 3, 4, 5, and 6 to begin with. So numbers, 3, 4, 5, and 6, and 6 is away from conflicts. Okay, so before we actually do all of that, I also want to demonstrate the utilization of values so we can also be pretty sure that the hierarchy we've elicited is correct.

So the next thing that you're going to do after getting the hierarchy in order and then the evaluation is what I'd like to demonstrate next, and we're going to ask Sun to come back up. Please give her a hand. All right, Sun, welcome back. Thank you. We're glad you're here.

I realize one thing that would have answered that question, which I just wasn't getting that question. What would have to happen for me to stop doing this, right? Stop doing what? Oh, that. That.

Yeah, yeah. Would be health. Okay. So health is important to you? Yeah.

That's good. Because that's the one time. So where would health go in this hierarchy? It would be really high. So, like what?

And we're looking at wall chart number 20. We're going to add health in there. Well, see, it depends. If it was somewhere else, if it was somewhere else in some other hierarchy somewhere that covered this one, because if I didn't have health, I wouldn't have any of this stuff. Sure, and this is your career values.

I know. So that's the one thing, though, that could knock me off of, out of working. Right, I'm getting there. That's happening. So these are your career values, and if you look at slide number 150, these are the areas of values that we mentioned earlier.

And so health and fitness may be of a higher value to you than your career, or having good health under the value of health and fitness may be of a higher value to you than your career. Is that correct? Yeah. The other possibility is that health is part of your career values, and it's important to you as you do your career that you're healthy, in which case we'll have to put it under career values. I'd like you to tell me which is the case.

So one possibility is that as you look at slide number 150, that health and fitness, the area of health and fitness, this one here, is more important to you than your career. That's one possibility. The other possibility is that health absolutely needs to be on your career values. No, actually health and fitness is higher than career. Okay, so health and fitness is more important to you than your career.

Okay, great. I just wanted to check that out. Okay. So we're going to look at these values for a couple of things. And if you're looking at page 324, I'm going to start with number three, motivation direction.

We'll pick up logical level of abstraction in syntax in a bit, but one of the things, a couple of things I want to look at is the possibility of conflicts that could exist in a number of different levels. The first thing that could exist is a motivation direction conflict with a toward, with an underlying away from underneath it. And if you look at page 326, this describes the three different possibilities with regards to motivation direction with regards to the conflict. The first is that a client could have a, for example, a value of money as toward, with an away from of poverty. The way this works is it's, I mean, the client may have given us toward words, but you have to ask the client to be honest with you and say, look, as you think of this value, and the question is, why is this important to you?

As you think of this value, and the question is, why is this important to you? As you think of this value, if a client has, here, think about this for a minute. If a client has a torrid word like, well, we'll use our example on page 326. If a client has a torrid word like money, if there's a hidden away from of poverty behind that, but the client doesn't say poverty, to the extent that the client is focusing on poverty, to that extent, that value is an away from value. So, for example, a client who is 50-50 toward and away from, so the client says money is important to me, and yet the client has at least half the time is focusing on moving away from poverty, then to that extent that client is going to create sequential incongruity, which is why it says sequential incongruity up there.

To the extent that the client has a toward-away-from conflict, that is to say that there's a toward value with a hidden away-from. How do you find out hidden away- froms? Because the words aren't there. But think about it for a minute. If a client gives you a value like money, but has a picture of poverty when they think of the value of money, or hears someone say something about poverty, or has a feeling, a negative feeling, then there are away froms behind the toward value.

So they can check the V-A-K-O-G to a lesser extent and the self-talk. So there's VAK and AD essentially primarily is what's going to tell us whether there's an away-from value behind the toward value. And the question we're going to ask the client is very simple. We're going to ask the question why. Now, I know in NLP you've heard, well, we don't ask why.

We're going to use why in a very special way in just a moment. And we'll see how that is. So the first possibility is that there's a toward-away-from value, there's a toward-away-from-value conflict at the unconscious level. And the way that will show up is we'll ask the client the question, why is that important to you? And we'll notice what kind of response we get.

If the client tells us what they want, then that's toward, isn't it? If the client tells us what they don't want, then what is that? Away from. And what you're looking for, if we go back and look at the notes on page 324, we're looking for negations, we're looking for comparative deletions, and we're looking for modal operators. Those will give us some examples.

Those will tell us there will be a tip-off that it's possible that there's an away from there. So that's one thing we're looking for. The second thing we're looking for is toward Toward conflicts. And if we have a toward-toward conflict, that could be like money conflicting with freedom. That's going to give us simultaneous incongruency.

It's going to give us simultaneous incongruency. So a client who is sequentially incongruent, and by the way, I'm not opposed to away froms, but a client who is sequentially incongruent may produce a sine wave sort of success, not success, success, not success, success, not success. If you're managing a salesperson who seems to go up and then down and then up and then down, they've probably got a significant number of away froms that they're focusing on in their values hierarchy. Okay? Oh, here's one other possibility.

A client could be like totally away from, even though they've got a torrid word. Now think about this. A client who's moving totally away from, it's like it starts down here. Just think of starting at the bottom. And the client climbs up and they're moving away from poverty.

So the client gets better and better and better and better and better. And at some point it gets good enough so they're not going to have any problem with poverty. At which point, if there's no toward value in this case, then all the motivation to earn money disappears. the away from has been met. Toward values give us a continuous movement into the future. Away from values, when the away from values have been fulfilled, they're no longer a problem.

They're not going to provide any motivation. So a client with significantly away from values, even if they've given us a toward word, like money, if they're focusing 90% on poverty, their life's going to get better and better. They're going to climb up, climb up, climb up. Imagine starting at the bottom, climbing up, climbing up, climbing up, and at some point they'll hit a threshold where it's not so bad as it used to be anymore. It ain't a problem.

Okay, no problem, but there's no motivation. And these people will create little crises, that's the plural of crisis, crises, to feel alive again. So that's the client moving away from, away from, climbing up, getting better and better, and then they notice, and of course it ain't so bad as it used to be, so in which case there's a crisis. So while away froms aren't evil, dirty, or nasty, they don't seem to work as well as towards in producing consistent motivation and consistent performance, especially in a business context. Okay, so we've got away-from, toward conflicts.

The toward-toward conflict is like money versus freedom, and that's going to give us simultaneous incongruency, which means that the client will feel like, I want to act, but I can't, and it's going to be at the same time. The solution for sequential incongruity of, like, for example, a toward and away from is going to be timeline therapy, or we'll look at one other possibility during this value segment. The other possibility is the toward-toward conflict, which is going to essentially be parts integration. So the intervention, and that's what it says right there on page 326, the toward conflict, for example, a client says, yeah, I want to make a lot of money, but if I do that, I won't have freedom because I'll be tied up all the time making money, but I want to make a lot of money. So there's a seemed conflict between, for example, money and freedom.

In that case, it's simply a parts integration that solves the problem. Third possibility is simultaneous incongruency, which is away from conflicts, which is an example in relationships might be intimacy versus abandonment. So intimacy versus abandonment works like this. Let's see. Don't leave me, which is away from abandonment, but don't get too close.

So don't get too close to me, but don't leave me, which is away from abandonment, but don't get too close. So don't get too close to me, but don't leave me. But don't get too close to me, but don't leave me. So it's back and forth, back and forth. Can I ask you a question?

Sure. So would that, when intimacy, would they have said they didn't want it? No, they'd be moving away from intimacy. How would you know that, though? Because just the word, somebody like that might be something they're moving towards.

Yeah, but if there's an away from something underneath that, we might not know what the word is. The word might be freedom, but it might be moving away from intimacy. So the surface word might be freedom, but you'd have to investigate. So we'll find out how we do that right now. So the question I want you to ask, and I'm going to demonstrate here with Sun, the question is, why is that value important to you?

And what you're going to do is you're going to ask that several times, and it's just a matter of numbers to find out what percentage of toward or away from or if there are any away from. And when we listen to the like, why is that important to you, the client's going to give us, is going to say things. And if the client tells us what they don't want, then it's away from. And if they tell us what they want, then it's toward. The prediction is, here's the prediction.

This is probably why values are so important to you. Are you ready? The prediction is, if the area of life that you pick to work on is not working for you, that it's quite likely that there are a significant number of away froms in your values hierarchy in that area. Okay, so whether it's career, relationship, etc. If the area of life you pick to work on is not working for you, it's quite likely there are a significant number of away-froms in your values hierarchy in that area.

And like I'm saying, I'm not saying that away-froms are awful, but they do actually cause inconsistent performance. So our purpose in getting rid of away-froms would be to smooth out our performance. Okay. Okay, with this in mind, then we're going to ask Sun the very simple question. There's no script for this because it's only one question.

So, Sun, let's just start and go down as many of these as we can here. So, being independent, why is that important to you? It gives me freedom. It gives you freedom. Why else is it important to you?

It gives me freedom. It lets me do what I want to do. It lets you do what you want. Why else is it important to you? Nobody tells me what to do.

Nobody tells me what to do. Is that toward or away from? It's away from. All right. Why else is it important to you?

It feels good. I'm in charge. I decide. Okay. Why else is it important to you?

Then I create whatever I'm doing. Okay, what else is important to you? I mean, that could be all there is. Okay, okay. All right, so we'll put a big T with a little a.

It was about 20% away from, at least in terms of the numbers. Now, Sun might have a different experience of that. Her focus on nobody tells me what to do might be more important than, and her focus might be, so let's ask Sun. So Sun, nobody tells me what to do. How important is that in your independence in the scheme of things?

A little bit. Okay, so 20%. Okay, fun and joy. Why is that important to you? Because if I'm not having fun, I don't want to be doing it.

I mean, fun's really important. Is that a negation? Yeah. I don't want to not have fun. Don't want to not have fun.

Right. Okay. Okay. So it looks like there's some away from it. And we can just cut to the quick here and ask Sun's unconscious mind what percentage of fun and joy is an away from.

Is an away from? Yeah. 50-50? 50-50, okay. So we'll put away slash toward, and I'll put a little 50% here so we know. Curiosity, anticipation. Why is that important to you?

When I'm curious, I do better work. Oh, what are we hearing? Comparative. Comparative. Unspecified comparative.

Whoa. Whoop, whoop. Red flag comes up. Our attention. Red flag.

Alert. There may be an away from. Whoop, whoop, whoop. Oh, sorry. That was our computerized away from warning system.

So let's just ask your unconscious mind what percentage you're away from. I really don't think that much. Okay, okay. What percentage? Ten.

Ten percent. Fifteen. Fifteen. Okay, big T, little a, 15%. Learning and growth, why is that important to you?

By the way, for those of you who are listening on tape, Sun just covered her mouth. Be honest now. Because I would do better work. Better work. As I learn, then I get better at what I do.

But how is that an away from? Well, I'm asking you, is there any percentage of away from there? A comparative doesn't mean there is an away from. It's just a red flag. It pops up and we go, we know we need to investigate that a little bit.

I don't think you need to investigate it very much on that one. So is it Tori? Very much. I heard the word come up. Hello, is that another comparison?

Okay, so how much do we need to investigate it? Five percent. Big T, little a, five percent. That's not much. Okay, creative.

Why is creative important to you? Oh, I love to be creative. I'm really creative. It's fun. Why else is it important to you?

I do better work. I can't believe that, Because I do better work. It's still little. It's little. Creativity is really important.

Very important. I'm with you. Totally. What percent? Five percent.

Five percent. Okay. Really love what I do. Why is that important to you? Freedom.

Yeah. I'm creating everything. Everything, yeah. Why else is it important to you? The results are better.

What's the percentage? Well, I don't really understand. The results are better, but... Yeah. 10%. 10% away from it. 15%. 15% away from it. Do I hear 20? 20 once, 20 twice.

So funny. No. Okay. Results. Oh, results.

Oh, why are results important to you? I have much more fun when I have... Yes, and why else is it important to you? I know I'm doing good work. Yeah, why else?

It makes me successful. Why else? It makes me very good at what I do. Why else? I love to have results.

Great, okay, so what percentage are you away from in the results? I don't think there's any. Okay. Well, you obviously do. No, I heard a comparison, that's all.

We're asking your unconscious mind. Really, you could say 5%, but I don't really think it's that much. Okay, well, we'll give you a tour. Okay. Success, why is success important to you?

I like the feeling of success. Okay, why else? It means I'm doing very good. What else? Why else is it important to you?

I get respect. Why else is that important? Respect, right. I don't see respect in there. Yeah, I know.

Is respect important to you? It is. Okay. Where does respect go in here? If you knew.

If I knew, it would be number 7A. Okay. I'm going to write it small, but you know it's... I know. It's going to get the respect it deserves.

Okay. So results is towards success. And as you said, success. Why else is success important to you? I like the feeling of success.

Why else? I don't want to not be successful. So what's the percentage of wisdom if it was? 45%. Whoa. That's almost 50.

Let's call TA 45%. And let's talk about respect. So why is respect important to you? It shows I'm doing a good job. Why else?

Very good. Why else? It creates good interactions with people that are doing similar work. Why else? I like that.

I like to be respected. I like to respect other people. Yeah. Why else? It feels good.

It feels good. Okay. Satisfaction. Why is satisfaction important to you? It makes me feel like I've done a job well done.

Why else? It makes me fulfilled. Why else? It gives me joy. It makes me feel I've really completed something.

Did you say that's a toward? Yeah. How about getting paid well? Why is getting paid well important to you? Because I need to be compensated for what I do because there have been times where I've chosen to not, where I've given my services away.

What percentage of that is away from? I was going to jump to the point here. 60%. Whoa. That's in a way with a T, and it's 60%. It might not be that big, but I get this feeling in my throat.

Yeah, it's fine with me. It's perfect. Okay, challenge. Why is challenge important to you? It makes me...

It's really amazing to hear your own words coming back and you go, whoa. It makes me more creative. More creative. Okay, why else? I do better work.

Why else? I get better results. Why else? I learn. Why else?

I'm challenged. It makes me think. It makes you think. Is there an away from component to that or what? Because there was a comparative, I'm just asking.

There was a comparative, but no. I was just surprised at the word. So it's tort. It's a tort. Connect with people.

Why is it important to you? I love to connect with people. Why else? I like to see the results that they get. Why else?

I have fun with them. I have a lot of fun with them. Why else? It makes differences in their lives. So it's towards.

Towards. Yeah, okay. All right, so based on our analysis here, I would say that there are some areas that we want to look at. You guys already know what they are, right, by looking at the chart. I think we need to look at fun and joy, and I think we probably ought to look at the issue of success and probably the issue of getting paid well.

Those are the three. I mean, to me, in a business setting, it depends on how, I mean, one of the things you can ask the client is how much time do you spend focused on the away from component of this? How much time do you spend focused on this is the issue that's going to affect the performance. So it's really a performance issue, the question of how much time do they spend on that. We're going to do the next one now, which is toward conflicts.

Toward conflicts is very simple to identify. You simply turn the list of values around to the client and you say, are there any of these that are possibly in conflict with each other? Are there any of these that are possibly in conflict with each other? I don't think so. So there's no conflict between being independent and being paid well?

I'm just going with my intuitive, you know, looking at it. Well, what I almost said is it makes it harder, but it really doesn't. It really creates more possibilities. Okay. No conflict between connecting with people and being independent?

Well, independence, what I meant by that was independence is not working for someone else. That's what I mean by independence. Right. That's really important. Whoa, does that change your level of toward and away from on that?

Not working with someone else? Is it being what you mean by independent? Or is that still big T, little a? No, I think it's big T, little a. Okay.

So nothing else in conflict? Not that I see. I don't know. So just go with your intuition. If the client says no, you're done with that segment.

And now we'll just go to the next one, number six, on your chart there. Which is, are there any away-from-away-from conflicts? So, where we've identified major away-froms is fun and joy, and success, and getting paid well. So, is there any conflict at all between the away-from side of fun and joy, success, or getting paid well? That's where we've identified the major conflicts, which is why we're going down those.

Those are major away-froms. Are you with me? Lauren, what do you need to ask? How do I know they're away-froms? What I'm not knowing is why they're away-froms.

I'm asking her if there are. I'm doing it the same way I did toward-toward conflicts. We don't know that they are. We're just asking her. But these are the major away-froms in her hierarchy.

Are you asking about the three of them compared to each other? I'm asking if there are any possible away-from-away-from conflicts in fun and joy, success, and paid well, because those are the only major away-froms in her hierarchy. Oh, so only with each other, then. Yeah. Okay.

So is there any possible conflict between the away-from side of fun and joy? No, I think the reason fun and joy came out so high was only because there have been times way in the past where fun was not. How far back are you pointing? Away. Way back.

Where fun and joy was not, like wasn't there, which is why it's pretty high now. Yeah. So that's just. So there's no conflicts between... Well, not between fun and joy.

Success and getting paid well. It's like, is there a conflict? We'll just ask specifically. Is there any conflict on the away-from level between fun and joy and success? I don't think so.

Is there any conflict on the away-from level between fun and joy and getting paid well? I don't think so. Fine. So we've identified that, and by the way, your client doesn't necessarily have to have toward-toward conflicts and doesn't necessarily have to have away-from-away-from conflicts. You just want to ask them.

Then the other thing we want to do is we want to look and see, in our own mind, is the number one value, now we're going to go back to the number one thing on this page, which is, is the number one value of a sufficiently high abstraction. So independence is a high abstraction, wouldn't you say? To me it's not as high as freedom or, you know, something bigger, but I think it's absolutely adequate level of abstraction. If it wasn't, then we'd, the client, we'd, we'd discuss it. The client and I would discuss it.

And maybe perhaps think about what to do about it. And I'll, we'll talk about changing values in the hierarchy next, but I want to go through this elicitation. So the three things we're going to do is we're going to go through that. And then, then we'll do number one, which is, is it, is it sufficiently abstract? And the answer is yes.

And then do these really lead to it? And I would say that based on what she said, we have a number of values which lead to higher-level values so that the value hierarchy really does that. Okay, once you do this and have this sort of in this order, it's kind of fun to do one more thing, and that is to utilize the values. So I want to demonstrate values utilization, and then I want you to go and do the exercise in this way, okay? So once we've got all this done, we've done all these things on this page, then we're going to utilize Sun's values, and the values utilization process is on page 321.

And it's very simple. You just take the values as elicited in the hierarchy and feed them back in a single sentence. Of course, my predilection is to do it wrong first. So I'm going to say, you know, son, I'd like to talk to you about a project where we're going to connect with people and there'll be a lot of challenge and you'll probably get a fair amount of satisfaction from it and success. And if you look at Sun's expression, she's being polite, essentially.

Okay, now watch what happens if we feed back her values in order of the top four, three or four values. Sun, I want to talk to you about a project where you're going to have a lot of independence and it'll be a lot of fun. you probably will create a lot of joy for yourself. You'll probably be anticipating what's going to happen next. You may even be curious and there'll be a lot of learning and a lot of growth and you'll be able to be creative. Sign me up.

Yeah. Notice the difference in the state that the client goes into. So you can always tell when you've got the values hierarchy really, you know, pumped. If you've got it absolutely right is that the client's going to go into the state, into a positive state, just as if you fed them back their strategy. So values utilization is the same.

You could do the values elicitation right at the end of the elicitation if you wanted to, or you could do it right here once you had them all, once you went through and noticed what the order and sequence of the values was and looked at the towards and the away froms. Thanks, son. Give her a hand, please. This is the end of Tape 24, Side B.