# Unconscious Mind, Quantumphysics, What You Believe Is Real Determines Your Result

Okay, so the question is, the question is, when you think about it, what is it that allows us to connect with neurotransmitters? What is it that allows us to get in there? So let me give you some thoughts here for just a minute. And then you think about that. So every single cell in the human body is bathed in neurotransmitter.

This was actually discovered by molecular biologists. And for those of you who would like to read the source on that, Candice Pert, who is a very well-known molecular biologist, was written up in the book Healing in the Mind, which I think is one of the major landmark books about the connection between the mind and the body, written by Bill Moyers. Actually, Bill Moyers did a PBS special on it a few years back, and even that was missed in terms of its importance. All right, so here's the question. The question is, if every single cell has bathed the neurotransmitter, then of course the question is, does every single cell have the memory, isn't it?

So if every single cell has bathed the neurotransmitter, does every single cell have the memory of the whole? And don't you remember earlier we said that even the little piece, even the little piece of hologram, when you ripped up that 3x5 card that you had when you were listening to the tapes, even that little, the smallest piece of hologram that you had left, the smallest piece of 3x5 card, even that little piece has the memory of the whole. So what it implies is, is even as we get down to the cellular memory of the individual, that that contains also the memory of the whole. Isn't that the implication? The implication is that every single part of the human being has the memory of the whole of the human being.

There's some implications for that neurologically, too, when we talk about parts. But we'll get there. So what is it that allows us to get in touch with that mind-body connection? What is it? What is it that allows us to access the neurotransmitter in the synaptic gap or the neurotransmitter that bathes every single cell in the human body?

Thoughts. And who's in charge of thoughts? You are. And what part of you is going to get you the deepest level of your thoughts? Your unconscious mind.

So now it's just a small shift in thinking because, and of course this is where the major leap forward for us is going to come because the mind-body connection lies in our ability to work with our unconscious mind. The mind-body connection lies in our ability to work with the unconscious mind. The body is a, so the human body is a quantum mechanical device. Your body is a quantum mechanical device, which means it's a device that responds to and obeys the laws of quantum physics. So we need to talk a little bit about that so that we all are working from the same set of presuppositions.

One of the things that is important about that notion, since the memory is seemingly everywhere. And since everything you think is going to affect every cell in your body, think about this for just a minute. If the memory is everywhere and there's the part in the whole, and if every single cell is affected by everything you think, then don't you think that what you think as real is going to be real? Or let's put it another way. Don't you think that the beliefs that you have are going to be acted upon as if they were real?

And this is especially true with regards to quantum physics. Because, and I don't know if you remember the experiments, but when they measured light as a wave, it behaved as a wave. Because they believed it was going to be a wave, and when they measured light as a particle, it behaved as though it were a particle. And it was simply a matter of their beliefs. So the truth is that, and this, by the way, this totally messed up the original quantum physicist.

Albert Einstein, Niels Bohr, hated this notion. Niels Bohr said, in fact, Niels Bohr said, if my observation affects that which I observe, then he says, then what is it to be said of a mouse observing the universe? If an observer such as a mouse can affect the observation of the universe, then what? And it drove the original conceivers of quantum physics a little bonkers. That's a technical term.

It's slightly off the wall. We talked about the wall, didn't we? So let me just ask you a question. Think about this for just a minute. If what you believe is real is real, and see, what quantum physics says is as you change your beliefs about reality, then you change your reality.

So when they go to measure light as a wave, it behaves like a wave. And there's a number of experiments that are written up in, for example, Beyond the Quantum by Michael Talbot, or Holographic Universe by Michael Talbot. And when they went to measure light as a wave, it behaved like a wave. And when they went to measure light as a particle, it behaved like a particle. And what they noticed was that the observations always and intimately affect the observed.

So here's, here's, here's one of the, here's one of the more famous experiments, which is on wall chart number three. A single source pulse, we'll mark this S with a circle around it, sends two electrons synchronized in two different directions. And the electron, or actually we'll make these photons. Why not? We'll call these photons.

So two different photons going in two different directions. And the photon on the left on your page is measured, and it changes course. And instantaneously, the photon on the right, in synchronization, also changes course. And what they postulated from this experiment was that the active observation, one of the things they postulated was that the active observation actually changed the path of the photon. The active observation actually changed the path of this photon.

What they didn't expect was it would change the path of the other photon. Now, can we just boggle our minds for a minute together? Why would, how is it possible that information could be propagated through the quantum, and by the way, I think it was like 7.57 times the speed of light that information was transmitted from one photon to the other causing it to change direction. That's give or take a few percentage points here or there. So one photon is measured, the other one changes direction.

It's propagated through the quanta very quickly. How is that possible? How is that possible? Much faster than the speed of light, and according to quantum physics, nothing can move faster than the speed of light. This drove Einstein a little nuts, too.

So think about this for just a minute. How is it possible that... There's two explanations for it. One is I'll give you the standard quantum physics explanation, and then I'll give you the other explanation. Think about it for a moment.

What if we had a goldfish bowl? This is the goldfish bowl experiment. What if we had a goldfish bowl with one goldfish in the bowl, and we were looking at the goldfish bowl from angle A? It could be any angle. Let's say it's directly on the bowl, looking at that direction.

And then at the same time, what if we had another camera 90 degrees from that goldfish bowl, looking at the same goldfish bowl with another angle, putting them up on two different television screens. And an observer looking at the goldfish would think possibly that he was or she was seeing two goldfish. Except that after some time, he would notice that the goldfish seemed to move synchronously. So one explanation is that on wall chart three, when our photon changes direction, that the other one changes direction. So what's important about this, first of all, is that the act of observation is intimately and always connected with the act of observing and with the observer and with the observed.

Which means that, for example, what's important to us and LP about this is that, for example, hypnosis. did experiment after experiment for many, many years with hypnosis for the purpose of determining what percentage of people were suggestible and what percentage of people would go into hypnosis. And they proved, using Newtonian physics, beyond a shadow of a doubt, by the way, Newtonian physics was invented 300 and, I think about 307 years ago, by Isaac Newton. And he gave us objective science, and objective science says the observer does not interact with the observed. By the way, that's a relatively recent thought on this planet. Because before 300 years ago, the observer was always and intimately connected with the observed.

Always. The observer was always part of the observed. Always. So only in the past 300 years have we had the notion of the objective scientist. And the truth is that quantum physics, of course, has come full circle now where you can't observe anything without affecting.

So the Hilgards proved that only 20% of people could go into a light trance, 60% into medium trance, and 20% into deep trance. But how did they prove it? Well, first of all, they took the hypnotist out of the equation by making a phonograph record and playing the phonograph record to the client. Do you remember your first, those of you that took our practitioner training, do you remember your first hypnosis exercise where you looked across at your client and when your client produced a phenomenon that looked like trance, you would say, that's right. How would you do that on a phonograph record?

Can you help me with this? Would you just say that's right at random times? That's right. So the Hilgards proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that, of course, the observer doesn't affect the observed, but wait a minute. See, like Erickson was very much into looking at the client.

So Erickson was kind of a quantum guy in and of himself. Because Freudian psychology essentially said don't look at the client. Erickson said I'm going to look at the client. Not only am I going to look at the client, I'm going to respond to what the client does so I'm intimately connected to what I'm doing. I'm intimately connected to the client in the process of doing hypnosis.

In the process of doing everything that I'm doing. Let me just give you one other thought. May I? About this notion. Because the goldfish bowl is not the only possibility.

The goldfish bowl is not the only possibility. I think. Did you all see the, did you all read the book Flatland? You ever heard of the book Flatland? This is a famous NLP book.

Famous NLP book. And of course, you all have heard about it. Well, anyway, in this book about Flatland, there's a point. And most of the people who live in this Flatland are points. But one day, there comes a line into flat land.

But nobody can see the line because the line is at right angles to the point. Can you conceive of how a flat piece of paper, even if you had a line sticking up out of a flat piece of paper, you'd still see the point? Do you get the point? Now think about this for just a minute. What if the two photons were points of a triangle?

Or two points of a circle? Two points of a circle. What if the two photons were two points of a circle whose arc was described like this, outward from the piece of paper that they're written on on wall chart number three, whose arc was described outward and around the other side? You can imagine that, right? And then how would they move outward?

They would move outward from being emitted from the source, and you would simply grab the circle and pull it away from you. And then, of course, the active observation would simply turn the circle, maybe at a right angle, and the electrons would move in different directions. Now, you can do this experiment yourself with a circle because most electrons most most electrons actually move in a circle right have you seen this experiment before in a dark room if you actually take and can you all see the the glow on this if i hold it right here not back there look at can you see the glow on this little flashlight here? Oh, let me get a flashlight. So if you want to do this on tape, take a flashlight.

And we were talking about waveform transmission, right? But you know that most electrons move in a circle, right? So if this is what it looks like in a circle. So take a flashlight and move it in a circle in a dark room, like this. Now, as I move in a certain direction, notice that it looks like a sine wave.

If I move fast enough, the circle turns into a sine wave. So if you do that in a dark room, you'll actually see it. If we could actually turn off all the lights in here, but since it's a little light outside right now, we can't. So if you take a circle and you move your arm in a circle, which I'm now doing with this flashlight, then as I move in a certain direction, watch this, watch this and notice that it actually looks like a sine wave. As I continue to move this in a circle, the light itself will actually begin to look like a wave.

So what we're doing is we're looking at another dimension that we hadn't thought of. We're looking at a whole other dimension that we hadn't thought of. And I just want to assist you in expanding your thinking, if I may. May I? So let me give you the rest of the question.

If our body is a hologram, if our entire nervous system, if the human being is a quantum mechanical device which is essentially holographic in nature, can I ask you a question? What is it a hologram of? If the human body is a, by the way, I'm not the first person to ask this question. Carl Prebram, who won the Nobel Prize for the holographic storage of memory, was the first person to ask this question. And he said, if our body is a hologram, what is it a hologram of?

Think about that for a minute. If our entire nervous system is a hologram, what do you think it is a hologram of? The universe. Thank you. That's exactly what Pribram concluded.

He began to investigate quantum physics, and what he concluded was... Remember our little experiment with our little holographic plate? The parts in the hole? So he figured in order to understand what we were a hologram of, we had to chunk up far enough. And so he chunked up about as far as he could.

It took him three or four levels. He said, what's this an example of? What's this an example of? What's this an example of? Or he said, for what purpose?

For what purpose? For what purpose? For what purpose? Which we'll get to in just a bit. And when he said, for what purpose, enough times he got to the universe, he goes, okay, that'll do.

But think about it for a minute. If the whole's in the part and the part's in the whole, then quantum physics comes full circle. And the Hawaiian saying, you might want to write this down, a iho ana o luna, a pi'i ana o lalo. Just kidding. Got you, though.

You guys are getting your pens out. That's good. A pi'i ana o lalo. And it was much more easily summed up by Hermes Trismegistus in 1500, who said, that which is above is like that which is below, and that which is below is like that which is above, which is that the entire universe is contained in you, and you are contained. And so that there's a part of you, so that in the seed there is everything of the tree, and in the tree there's everything of the seed, and we're but a seed of the universe.

Which are, which, by the way, there are some very, very important parts to this concept as we go through this training, which I want to continue to share with you and point out to you. And one of the most important concepts then, because if your nervous system is the same as the universe, then whatever you think you are at this moment, you're always much more than that. If at any given moment you have a thought, then that thought limits who you think you are. And that moves us to the notion of, hey, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. Because even if you have a thought, that thought puts boundaries on the unlimited boundlessness of your nervous system.

And we're going to talk about the void, or the state of no thoughts, as we move into this. Are we shaking up your model of the world enough yet? Didn't know you had one. Good. Good.

Good. So, what you focus on determines your life. What you focus on determines your reality and what you believe as real is going to be real. And when you change your beliefs and your focus, what happens is, is you change your reality. If I may Now, this is a very important part of that concept, so let's talk wall chart number four.

This is a diagram. This diagram, you've seen this before, I'm sure, if you've studied with me. If you haven't, then welcome to this diagram, which says a cause causes a certain effect. This is a metamodel pattern. You all know the metamodel.

It's one of the patterns in the metamodel. It's actually the third pattern on our chart. Cause and effect. And what this, now think about this from the point of view of, because you all have heard this before, but think about this from the point of view of what you believe as real creates your universe. Most people go through life, which side of this equation?

Most people go through life on the effect side, so I've drawn a thick line underneath the effect side. And most people go, you know, I would have been great except for, and then they'll blame something or someone inside or outside of themselves. By the way, for those of you who are doing therapy when you leave here, how many people are doing therapy when you leave here? How many people are doing business with this material? How many people are doing education with this?

Okay. So whether you're in business, education, or therapy, by the way, there's a common metamodel pattern or violation in the inherent interaction, which I'd like to point out. And the metamodel violation is that most clients will come to you and they'll say, I'm at the effect of some cause, either inside or outside myself, over which I have no control. Can you help me? That's one word, by the way, usually.

You can't tell I've heard that so many times. It's one utterance. It's one complete thought for them. And of course, like for me, the first thing I go is, whoa, wait a minute, what's wrong with this picture? And they're on the effect side of the equation, aren't they?

Now, the minute you move them from the effect side of the equation to the cause side of the equation, who wins? Everybody. Because they, and by the way, the whole thing about this is, the whole deal about this is empowerment. I'm sorry to say that. The whole, the important part of this is empowerment.

It's, if the client walks in and we move the client to the cause side of the equation, then what the client says, hey, I'm at the cause for all the things that happen in my life. I'm in charge of them. Now, do you think just doing that will change the universe? It has to. It has to.

If light behaved as a wave when we measured it as a wave, if light behaved as a particle when we measured it as a particle, then changing our thinking about what we're going to do is going to change our universe. That's why Niels Bohr was nuts when he got done with all this. Did you hear the quote? Did you hear the quote? He said, I hate this damn thing.

I'm sorry I ever invented it. That notion totally flipped him out. He couldn't handle it. Like you invent quantum physics, like a major thing, and he goes, I hate it. Man.

And this is one of the big issues. Like, if you change your beliefs, then the entire universe will respond to the change of beliefs. So I'm going to show you in this training the notion of whose responsibility it is for change. And actually, I'd like to share with you that notion at the moment, right now. Can I?

Can we talk for a minute? Okay. One of the biggest things that comes up in, in, in client interactions is who's the person that's got to do the change work? And people come to me and they go, Ted, I want you to change me. And I go, okay, but I can't.

You'll have to change yourself. I'm just a tour guide. So the client says, I want you to change me. And the question is, here's the question. The question is, who's going to do the change work?

And I say to the client, you're going to do the change work. One of the interesting things, actually the place where it shows up the best, the most, the place where it shows up the most, where it's easiest to understand, the quickest, is in hypnosis. The place where it shows up easiest to understand, the quickest way to understand it is in hypnosis. So, do you want to play for a minute? Think about this for just a minute.

Many people who have trouble going into trance have trouble going into trance because they don't want to be hypnotized or they believe they can't be hypnotized. And they'll come to me and they'll go, I can't be hypnotized. So what I'll say to them is, okay, great. Do you want to know how to go into trance? They'll go, yeah.

I'll say, will you follow my instructions? They say, yes. So I say, great. Close your eyes and relax the muscles around your eyes so they're so relaxed you can't possibly open them. And when they're that relaxed, then holding on to the relaxation, I want you to try to open them and find you cannot.

So the client closes their eyes, and they relax their eyes. And normally, if it's one of these folks who says, I can't be hypnotized, then you say, okay, whenever you're ready, go ahead and test, and they'll open their eyes. And I say, no, no, you opened your eyes. Now what I want you to do this time is close your eyes and relax the muscles around your eyes so they're so relaxed you can't possibly open them. And when they're that relaxed, then, and only then, test them and try to open them.

You want to do this yourself? By the way, we're going to get to this, and if you're listening to this tape set, this information will not be on this tape set, but it is covered currently in Deep Trance Phenomena, and fully covered in the tape set called Deep Trance Phenomena, and I'm borrowing on the work of Dave Ellman, which is covered in there. For those of you who are here for this training, we'll be getting into that in our master hypnotherapy training program. But I want to give you a preview of it, the notion of the question, see because here's the question, who's in charge of the client going into trance? You as a hypnotherapist or the client?

The client, of course. So you want to try this? Let's try this together. So would you please, if you want to try this, just go ahead and close your eyes. Whenever you're ready, just go ahead and close your eyes.

And relax the muscles around your eyes so that they're so relaxed you couldn't possibly relax them anymore. Just go ahead and do that. Relax the muscles around your eyes so that they're so relaxed that you couldn't possibly relax them anymore. Just relax them so that they're so relaxed. And when they're totally and completely relaxed, they're so relaxed you couldn't relax them anymore, then, and only then, try to open them, holding on to that relaxation, all the while holding on to that relaxation, and find that your eyes stay closed.

Whenever you're ready, just test. Good. Once you've tested, come on back. Open your eyes. Interesting concept.

Most of the clients who I talk to, especially if they said, I can't be hypnotized, it takes two or three times, and then they finally get it. They go, oh, I've got to keep my eyes closed. Right. Good. So, in fact, the question is, who's in charge of change?

Like with timeline therapy. And by the way, if you're listening to this tape set, the timeline therapy segment is in the master timeline therapy training tape set. But who's in charge in timeline therapy? I mean, a client could sit there and pretend to follow your instructions but not follow them and possibly get no change. Who's in charge of following the instructions?

The client. So I think one of the important things that we need to say about NLP at this point and this notion of cause and effect is that your client's in charge of making the change. You're a facilitator. And I think current thinking in hypnosis and neurolinguistic programming, or at least in this little branch of NLP, in our little branch, the current thinking is it's the client's responsibility for doing the work. We're just facilitators.

Now, early on in hypnosis, it was thought, oh, I'm going to do something to you, or I have power over you. And that, of course, was coming off of a pretty rigid way of thinking from Victorian England. Hypnosis was invented in 1843 by James Braid. Actually, the term was coined. It wasn't really invented by him, but the term was coined in 1843.

And if you think back to 1843, if you're familiar with the time period, it was a pretty sort of a rigid thinking kind of time period. So I think it was appropriate at the time, but current thinking in the field of hypnosis is that it's a dance. It's an interaction. It's a relationship between you and the person you're working with. So as we begin to move in our NLP training, in our master practitioner training, this notion of cause and effect is very important, too.

Very, very important. That it's going to be the client's responsibility to go ahead and make the changes. This is the end of Tape 2, Side A................................................................................................................................. ................................................................................................................................