# Chaining Anchors

Okay, with all those caveats, let's find out from you guys. Assuming we were doing a chain of procrastination to motivation, what would be a really good second state? Murray? Boredom. And what did Murray do, what did Murray do when he, when he mentioned the word boredom?

He actually used an adjective modifier. And what Murray did was he used an adjective modifier to, obviously, Murray, you've taken our accelerated practitioner training and you've done well. Murray used an adjective modifier to modify the state of boredom to the point where he called it excruciating boredom. So anytime you take a state like this with a client, you're talking to a client, anytime you're going to ask the client, well, what would be a good second state, then you want to amplify that state so that it really is heavy duty. And so don't just say boredom, but say excruciating boredom.

I like that. Boredom is a threshold for you. A little bit wouldn't move you. I like it. Having to watch your next door neighbor's slides in Cleveland.

That's excruciating for him. What other states are good second states? Anxiety. Here's the problem with anxiety. The problem with anxiety is, at least in this little branch of NLP, is that we likely may take out anxiety with timeline therapy.

So while that could be a good state, it might not be present afterward. And if we did take out all of anxiety, we might even take anxiety out of the chain, so the chain might not pull through. So I'll put it down. And the only other question you have to ask the client if they say anxiety is, you have to say, did that get you off of procrastination before? Because some folks who procrastinate are really good at procrastinating and being anxious about it.

So you've really got to test the client and say, did this anxiety or would anxiety really have you get off of procrastination in all circumstances? Okay. Yeah. Shame is kind of like guilt. Here's a problem, too.

If you look at the bottom of number 97, there's one more on there that I didn't cover yet, and that is that each of the states should be self-initiated. So the problem with shame is, and this is one of the things that is especially an issue, especially in getting off in procrastination, if the person doesn't have someone outside of themselves to be ashamed for, I think that would be the way to put it, then the chain might not fire off because there was no one else present out there and they would procrastinate. So the chain might not pull through. So the problem with shame is that it depends upon someone else to create the chain working. Yeah?

If it's an internal frame of reference, I'm willing to give that to you. The problem is that most shame is dependent upon someone else for the creation of it. So I think I'd have to say probably not. Yeah? Okay.

Yes? Anticipation. I put boredom and anxiety in a different place from anticipation. Actually, what I'm trying to do is separate these as to toward and away from. And by the way, there's no one way, I need to say this too, there's no one way to get from procrastination to motivation.

Some NLP trainings teach a single chain that they have everybody install. I don't think that's as good as installing a chain for the client. I mean, there's no one way to get from hesitation to going for it. There's no one way to get from stuck no options to, you know, going for it. There's all kinds of different ways, and it depends on your client.

And so I think you have to look at the client and notice what they need. So the top sort of extra states are away froms. The bottom one are towardses. And anticipation is a good state, but how about not just anticipation, but wanton anticipation? Don't you think?

Or burning. Oh, Jean likes that. He goes, I think I like that. That's because you're Francais. May we always keep the fire in the furnace.

Keeps the whole house warm. Exactly. Okay, what other states? Frustration. Incredible frustration.

Yeah. I like it. Curiosity. Curiosity, I like that. But burning curiosity.

Like, have you ever been curious about what your parents did when they closed the door to their bedroom? Despair. Now, here's the thing about despair. I don't know about you. Here's what I do when I get a state, by the way.

I go and try it on. When you try on despair, do you get a state with movement or one without movement? To me, I kind of get no movement. I don't know. If you were the client, I don't know.

If you've got movement from despair, cool. But generally, for me like when I go in and try on despair, I don't feel like there's any movement there. And I want to have, I want to have movement. Yes? That's like, if this was a, if this was a blackboard and I took my nails and went like this, and then went down the board.

Yeah, that's a good one. That's good. Okay. What else? Yeah.

Urgency. Well, now here's the deal with urgency. Is it inner, directed, or outer directed? So a lot of times urgency is, see, and the other thing is, could the client still have it be urgent and procrastinate? Most clients I've talked to, the urgency was outer directed.

And they could procrastinate just as well whether it was urgent or not. You know what I'm saying? I mean, they could like, they could go, yeah, it's urgent, but I'm procrastinating still. So, again, that's another issue is, could they still, would it be a sufficient state to move them on to the next state? Yeah.

What about hesitation? The problem with hesitation is, does it have any movement? Just to get them from the point of being stuck to maybe moving, to be hesitating, just as a small step. Here's the only problem I have with hesitation is it doesn't have movement. It's sort of like, it's like this.

I don't see the movement in it. I'd have to check it with the client. Again, there's no hard, fast rule, but if you look at the client, try it on yourself, and notice if, does it move the client? Does it get them going? And if they say yes, because everybody has different meaning for different words.

Passionately inspired? I like that thought, but I don't know how associated it is. So how about driven? Driven. Passionately inspired, so passionately inspired that you're driven.

Would that be okay? Yeah, okay. So let's get that down. We'll put passion and driven. I like that.

It makes the word inspired go well. If a client said to me, just inspired, I'd wonder if that was a sufficient state. Don't you wonder? Inspired? But passionately inspired, yeah, almost.

So driven, like someone who has a life's work that they're just driven to complete. That would work for me. I was just using inspired because I know that's one thing that actually moves me from procrastination. Always? A lot of time, yeah.

If I'm procrastinating and all of a sudden I find that something actually inspires me, the same thing, I can look at it in a different way that inspires me. Is that outer directed, though? It is. So something that inspires you is not going to, if you don't find something that inspires you, you're not going to get off of procrastination. Yep.

That's a problem. It is. Yeah. Yeah, so that's required. Okay, so, yeah, okay, we'll skip that.

How about burning desire? Yes, I like that. Or wanton desire. That's also fun. And remember your adjective modifiers.

How about impatience? Impatience. That's kind of fun. Have you ever been, Jean, like Jean, he knows there's five watches and he's waiting in the mail to find out if he got one. Right?

Impatience, yeah. Or there's this wonderful cartoon of two vultures sitting on a tree and they're looking down and one of them says, to hell with patience, I'm going to go down there and kill something. Yes, Rich? Elevating stimulation. Elevating stimulation.

Some people like that. There's a few woos from the audience. The thing is, does that do it for you in terms of like, when I try that, I don't know what that is. Do you know what that is? Yes.

Okay. John's got that. Okay. Well, if he's got it, it must be real. Okay.

Stimulation. How about suspense? Suspense. Well, but the thing is, the word itself implies no movement, doesn't it? Something in the gate ready to move.

Something in the gate ready to move. Okay, the only thing for me is that it does not, ready to move doesn't imply movement. So if I put that in the middle of a chain, like if I put that right after procrastination, I don't know where the client's going to go with it because he's not moving. And I want him moving by the second step, or I want her moving by the second step in the chain. Yeah, so I think I probably would not do that.

Is resolution too close to drive? Well, here's the deal with resolution. Here's the deal with resolution. If I got resolution, I'd be finished before I to motivation. It's the same thing as accomplishment.

Some people often say, oh, accomplishment, that really motivates me. But once you get accomplishment, you're done. It's kind of like resolution and accomplishment. Are you beginning to get a sense of this? When Russ said suspense, I experienced anticipation.

Good. And so could it go in the section just ahead? Well, what I would do is I would define it as anticipation for the client. I would attempt to define that as anticipation. Suspense.

The problem is that it's not moving yet. It created major anticipation for me. Good. For you, I would use it then. For you, I would use it, but I'd be careful with the word as a general rule because it implies not movement.

I mean, just the word itself. Yeah? Other ideas? What about anger? Anger.

Here's the problem with anger. When we do timeline therapy, we're going to get rid of it. If we happen to do timeline therapy as part of the intervention. Anger when you want to change something? If we did timeline therapy and we got rid of all anger, then we might end up without a state in the middle of the chain.

I thought you just got rid of debilitated anger from the past. Yeah, from the past. Not so that you can't notice something that, gee, I'd like to change that one. Like you're never going to get mad again? No.

No, we get rid of all anger from the past. But if you do a timeline therapy intervention after you install the chain, the chain will disappear. But for a new event that comes up. If you do timeline therapy after you install the chain, the chain will disappear because anger will be in the past. Even anger in the chain.

Oh, yeah. Yeah? So it's possible that the anger will disappear. So I kind of stay away from that. It certainly is possible to use that.

I have a little problem with anger as installing that from an ecological point of view, and that is that according to the Journal of the American Medical Association, anger is like a prime suspect in the cause of heart attack at this point. And there was a recent study within the last couple of months, so let's say it would be September of 1996, roughly, which said that when you get angry, it dumps a bunch of cholesterol into the bloodstream for the purpose of simulating the fight-or-flight response. The cholesterol gets burned during the fight-or-flight response. And if you don't exercise right after that, then the cholesterol stays in the body. So the negative effects of anger would cause me probably not to use that state anyway, even if I wasn't going to get rid of it with timeline therapy.

How about empowered? If the client was procrastinating because they didn't feel empowered, then I think that certainly would be a good second step. The question is, though, when you feel empowered, is that a state that's highly associated? Is it something where you have a lot of, does it have a lot of juice to it? I mean, I don't know.

When I try on empowered, it's far less stimulating than boredom, anxiety, frustration, irritation, anticipation. Yes, Marcel? Compelling lust. Whoa! Compelling lust.

Nice modifier. Can't stand it anymore. Gotta have it. Yeah, it's entirely possible. It depends on the state and whether you could elicit it that way.

Let's say can't stand it. The problem is that it may be outer driven, but we'll put it there anyway. Can't stand it. And what was the other one? Murray, gotta have it.

Aggloration. Tromping down on the throttle of your Kawasaki Ninja. Like to whip your head back. What was that? Yeehaw.

Yeehaw. Let me see if I can get that right. What's the name of that feeling, Murray? Yeehaw. Well, I can't write that down.

I don't know how to spell it. What did you call that? Oh, exhilaration. I can spell that. Powerless.

But powerless, does that have implied movement to it? I mean, if you moved away from it, I would say it's possible. But the problem with powerless is it implies disempowerment of the client. But I think you all get the idea. You all get the idea?

Yeah, I think, I mean, from these states, I think you definitely have the idea. The question is to look out at the client and notice what it is that the client needs in the process of installing a certain state. And I think that you've got to actually look at the client, notice what they need, notice where they are, and by calibrating them as you do the process, you're then going to know whether or not which state would be appropriate to use. Okay, so what I want to do now is to demonstrate a chain of anchors, chain design, and so forth. And what I'm going to need is someone to be a volunteer.

Let's see, since you guys have already done procrastination into motivation, and by the way, if you haven't done procrastination into motivation, what I'd like you to do if you're listening to the tape set is to do that particular chain design. Get together with a client and go ahead and do that chain design. So there's a couple possible states, and you could look and see if you are subject to any of these states ever. One is stuck no options, would be kind of like this. I'm stuck with no options to going for it.

And another one might be, let's see, hesitation to going for it. Those are two other possibilities. Does any of those relate to anyone? Or does anyone procrastinate still who would like to not procrastinate? Hesitation to going for it?

You know, like you don't fully go for it? Murray? Okay, come on up. Give Murray a hand. Thank you for all of your great suggestions with regards to states.

Were those the states you wanted to have installed there? Well, they're ones that work for me. They work for you? Oh, yeah. This time I see them.

The last time I was up here, I didn't really see these people. How do they like that? I don't know. That was a switch of referential index, wasn't it? Okay, Murray, so what's your presenting problem?

At times I have this stuck no options thing. Really? Yeah, that's... Really, really, really? How do you...

Can I borrow one of your hands, by the way? Murray, I'm going to have to borrow your knuckles. Oh, please. I'm going to have to borrow your knuckles from time to time. So let me just ask you a question.

Okay. How do you do stuck-no options? Is that something that you can, like as you sit here right now, can you do stuck-no options for me? Yeah. I mean, you can do that, right?

Uh-huh. You can do stuck-no options? Mm-hmm. Can you? Okay.

You smell popcorn? Yeah. You do? Well, that's interesting. Oh, no.

That was a break state, by the way. So, Murray, stuck no options. What do you think would be a reasonably decent state to move you off of stuck no options? I mean, when you're stuck and ultimately you want to be going for it, that would be a good state to be at the end state, wouldn't it be? Oh, yeah.

That would be real good. Okay, so when you're stuck with no options, when you feel like you're stuck and you've got no options at all, what would be a state that would move you off of that state? What would have to happen such that would move you off that state? Well, excruciating boredom would do that for me because to me that's like fingers on a chalkboard. Have you ever been really bored?

I mean really bored. Yes. Really bored. Yeah. Okay, so bored.

Now, you'd do anything to get away from boredom, wouldn't you? Yeah, if it goes over the threshold, you bet. What would be the next thing that would get, if once you were beyond, once you were over the threshold and ready to move off of boredom, what would be the next thing that would be, that would move you to going for it? Like, when you think about it. Maybe it'd be one of those states you mentioned like...

Oh, anticipation or... Yeah, you sound really congruent about anticipation. No, no. Tad said, shaking his head, no. No, it's got to be something with a little more juice in it than that.

Yeah, really, Murray. Like what? Like what? It would be more of a sort of an exhilaration. Exhilaration?

Yeah. Is that the yee-haw? Yeah, that's, that state's got some go to it. It's got some go to it. Like when you're, like when you're, like what?

Okay. All right, let's see now. What I want to do now is I want to go back and I want to install the chain by eliciting the states. And you may have noticed I was also, as I borrowed his hand, just sort of grabbing the first states that he came up with to see what we had. But now I want to actually go back and formally install the states.

So, Murray, can you remember a time when you were really stuck? I mean, like, I know, I know, I know. The time when you were the most stuck. I mean, you were, like, so stuck, you were, like, you thought you'd never get out. Totally stuck.

That's not fun. Do you remember another time you were like totally stuck? I mean really stuck. Totally stuck. Yeah.

Can we test that just for a second? Let's see what happens when we do that. Excellent. Okay. It's a bummer.

So what I did was I, each of those times, anchored Murray. It's unfortunate, those of you who are listening to these tapes actually can't see the video, but each of the times I elicited the state and then anchored him on the first knuckle. And we could see, could we see a shift in Murray? Yeah. Okay.

Okay, Murray, let's see now. Oh, man. Excruciating boredom. I mean, like, the, what's the word? I mean, have you ever been, like, really, really bored?

I mean, and then they told you you had to wait? That one also has a lot of frustration in it. Excellent. We'll just stack that up in there. It's both.

Yeah, yeah. Boredom causes frustration. Okay, good. Good. We're right there.

All right. Yeah, good. I swear I... I guess... Oh, yeah.

It's not that bad. All right, Murray. You're right there. You're ready to jump out of the airplane door. That's one motorcycle for me.

Oh, it's a motorcycle. Oh, yeah. You wind up that. You wind that sucker up, right? Well, this is that feeling of when you accelerate on a bike that's got so much power, it's all you can do to hang on to it.

You ever done that? Yes. Why don't you just step right into your body and just feel the feelings of that exhilaration. Good. That's 0 to 135 in 12 seconds.

That long, huh? That long. Have you done that more than once, haven't you? Yeah. What was another time you did that?

Can you remember another time you did that? Just step right into it. See what you saw. Woo! We're rolling now.

It takes a breath away, doesn't it? Yeah. Okay. All right. Now, a time when you were going for it.

I mean, you may have had obstacles in the past. You may have had different things that got in your way. But I mean a time when they were out of the way and you were just like going for it. Do you remember a specific time like that? Good.

That's a nice state, isn't it? Yeah. I like that one. You like that one? Each of the times, by the way, in the middle of enlisting the states, I've been actually applying the anchor.

Okay, Murray, so another time when you were really, really, I mean, really going for it. Okay. Really going for it. Just no holds barred, all the way. Want him going for it, all the way.

That's good. Good. Good. Okay. Maybe we should test some of these intermediate states here just for a moment.

Let me, like, test this one. Excellent. Okay, clear the screen there, Murray. I was testing procrastination into frustration, and he actually gave us almost exactly the same physiology, didn't he? Yeah, it's really good.

Okay, now, let's see. I wonder what this one is here. Good, Murray, that's good. Excellent. Yeah, no.

I think it's... It's weird when you can push your buttons like that, isn't it? Oh, man. All right. Here's the last one.

This is the... Going for it. Let's see what we get here. Good. Good, okay, so what we've done is we've tested all the anchors, we've tested the stuck no options first, just to make sure we had that nicely installed.

Then I installed the other three, tested them now. And how many times have we stacked these? I actually, because I like naturally occurring states, I may also stack an anchor with the client as we elicit the states in the first place, especially if the client goes in to the state. But we'll do the formal stacking when we come back and do the installation. So how many times did we stack?

We actually stacked each of these three times. The first time when we got into the state naturally, and the next two times when we elicited it, making approximately three for each one. Now what I want to do is I want to go ahead and chain these together. So I'm actually going to put these together in a chain, and what I'll do is I'll fire one while, when Murray comes up to the peak of that, we'll add two. Now, one of the things that, and this particular outline is on slide number 98, one of the things that we want to do here is we want to chain them all together.

And so in chaining anchors, the first finger is going to be on the anchor until it comes up to the peak, and then you add the second finger on the anchor when it hits the peak, when the second state hits the peak. How do you know the state hits the peak? You know because of your sensory acuity. You actually see the shift in the various things. Then when the second state comes up to its peak, you add the third state, taking your finger off the second state.

So for a moment in chaining anchors, but only for a moment will both fingers be on the same time. It's not a collapse because both of them don't reach the peak at the same time, so it becomes a chain. All right, Murray, let's go ahead and do this and see what we get here. So this is our first day. Okay.

We went one, two, three, four. And now, so what we did is we chained 1 to 2 to 3, 4. You all saw that. Now what should happen is when we fire 1, we should watch the chain pull through. We should actually get 2, 3, and 4.

In some cases, we may not get 2 or 3. It depends on the person. You never know. Some cases Some cases will just end up in four, but we'll have to see what we get here. So Murray, let's try this and see what we get.

It sort of bypasses it. Murray, let me just ask you a question. Have you ever been, like, stuck no options? Yeah, I was, wasn't I? It was a problem, wasn't it?

Yeah. Okay. Now, here's what we're going to add next. You can sit here while I explain this, right? We're going to turn to page 426, and we're going to add the four-step swish pattern.

The four-step swish pattern is very, very useful in cementing home, in actually finishing up, in bringing to the forefront in, let's see, and that's actually going to be slide number 100. We're actually going to take, and we're going to ask Murray to swish up, to actually start with the first picture. So we're going to actually have him get pictures of each one. And he's going to swish up each subsequent state as I press the anchor. So now that the chain's installed, he's going to actually do a four-step swish where each of the states comes up afterwards.

So I'm going to ask you to slow it down once again. Okay. When you think of, when you think of, and I'm going to do this quickly, then we'll go back and unpack what I did, because Murray's right in the state, and I want to make sure we get him done. So when you think of stuck no options, you have a picture of that, right? Oh, yeah.

Okay, good. When you think of excruciating boredom, do you have a picture of that? And when you think of exhilaration, do you have a picture of that? And when you think of going for it, do you have a picture of that? Okay.

Okay, good. So could you have stuck no options on the screen? Okay. And then the other three in order, small and dark in the lower left-hand corner, and I'll tell you which one to go ahead and switch up. So you've got the first picture.

It's on the screen. Stuck no option on the screen. And you've got excruciating boredom in the lower left-hand corner. It comes up. Ready?

One, two, three. And then we've got exhilaration ready to come up. One, two, three. And then we've got going for it ready to come up, one, two, three. Good.

Good. Okay. Now, let's test again. You stay, though, isn't it? Oh, yeah.

Break state? Water's nice out there. Water's nice. It was good. Good.

Okay, Murray, so what happens when you think of, can you imagine a time in the future when you'd be, might be stuck and have no options? What happens? It's hard to imagine it like that. Good. That's weird.

Good. So you end up in the... How do you feel when you think of... I mean, you've been stuck in no options before, haven't you? Oh, yeah.

Well, you're good at that. You were, weren't you? Yeah, I used to be. That's right, you used to be. Very good.

So when you think of it, what happens now? It's sort of hard to think of it. It's kind of like trying to grab a picture that isn't there. Good. Good.

By the way, that may be the effect of the swish pattern that we just did, is to swish up the other ones. So when you think of stuck-no options, what happens? It's like it goes. Excellent. Excellent.

Good. Give Murray a hand. Thanks, Murray. Good job, buddy. Good job.

Okay, so let's go back and unpack the four-step switch pattern, and then we'll take some questions. You're going to test the chain, first of all, make sure the client ends up in the final state. We're looking at page 426. Then you're going to ask the client to slow down the states again while he or she does a switch for each one. You're going to set up a picture for each of the states in the chain by asking the client for a visual for each state.

And then once the client has all four, or if you do five, then each of those pictures, then have them have the first picture, then the second picture, and the third picture, and so forth, and have them swish up. Really simple process, but it adds another dimension to the chain of anchors, which really seems to cement at home. So especially, and by the way, my belief is that the chain of anchors is the most effective intervention for procrastination that we've got in NLP. And I would definitely use this each time, if I ever had a client come to me for procrastination, I'd definitely use chaining anchors. And each time then you can finish up the intervention with a four-step switch.

Okay, so any questions about what we just did? If you've already had the anchors chained on your knuckles, can you do on top again, or do you have to move? Which hand did you have them there? They're on both. Okay, well, you have to use anchor off, okay?

So it goes like this. Yes. Well, here's the deal. What you want to do is you want to see, because a lot of times what will happen is they'll neurologically integrate, and the chain of, the anchors where they were don't, I mean, it doesn't matter. On the other hand, they may not.

So you may want to use other knuckles like your, well, you could use the mid-knuckles of your finger, or you could use other parts. You're going to have to see – fire off where the chain was and see if that actually – see if it brings up any states or if you notice any shift in your physiology. Murray was doing the Swiss pattern. Was he associated or disassociated? Actually, generally, the present state is associated and desired state is dissociated.

Other questions? Do you have an intervention, let's say, for family therapy where the couple has accumulated several negative anchors where you can, I guess, wipe them all out? Yes, we do. The intervention for couple counseling for couples that have a whole bunch of negative anchors, is generally timeline therapy. So if you take whatever presenting problem that the clients bring up, or whatever emotions constitute the presenting problem that they bring up, then by getting rid of those negative emotions, you probably will get rid of the anchors.

You may have to do collapse anchors when they come back the next week. You may have to do a collapse anchor on specific ones, but my experience is you probably won't have to. Yeah. All right, so let's move on to strategy design and installation. Before we actually move on to strategy design and installation, if you've not done a chain of anchors, we're going to do that now.

So if you're listening to the tape set, what I'd like you to do is to get together with another person and design and install a chain of anchors. Procrastination and motivation is one useful chain to install. Hesitation to going for it or stuck no options to going for it is another possible set. And then also add on to it the four-step swish. If you've never done a four-step swish, you may want to try that also.

So get together with someone else and do that. And if you're listening to the tape, go ahead and stop the tape now and do that exercise. This is the end of Tape 12, Side B.