# Nlp&Healing

Okay, so there's a relationship between the thoughts you think and the possible diseases you may produce. There's a relationship between your temperament and the kind of prevalent thinking that occurs in your body and the kinds of diseases you may produce. Why is that? Wall chart number two, you remember our diagram on the very first day of the neuron and the neurotransmitter, and how we said that every single cell in the body is affected by neurotransmitter, because every thought that you think is transmitted to your body. So essentially, the prevalent thoughts that you think will create your body, and will affect your health health and essentially will create your body.

And we create our body based on what? We create our body based on observation and the filters. And essentially the way we do that is from the void. In fact, if you look at slide number 107, at the level of the void, there's no time. Although we create our body from that, it manifests on the surface based on the prevalent thoughts that we have.

If we can reverse the process, healing can be instantaneous. However, in order to transfer information from the level of the void through the mental level, through the emotional level, to the physical plane, which, by the way, is essentially space and matter, we also need time and energy. We also need time and energy. Let's go back and look at page 1-4 in our notebook. Page 1-4.

And one of the basic filters, one of the very early filters that we've been talking about since the entire training, is the experience of time, space, matter, and energy. So, essentially, we create our bodies based on our experience, based on our observation. But in order to transfer the healing from the void, or that area that knows only truth, to the body, which is space and matter, we also may need time, which is time for the healing process to take place, and also includes perhaps the notion of timeline therapy and energy. Conversely, in order to make a disease disappear, you may need to take the matter in space and time and put it into the void. And what happens is an energetic shift will occur.

And we've seen the energetic shift occur in virtually every one of our demonstration subjects, and you've probably seen it occur as you've done the exercises. Every single time when you've got a major piece, every single time when something occurred that transformed the client, regardless of what it was, your client dropped into the void. Probably, if only for a moment. And remember we've asked over and over again during this training how many people at any time during this training experienced a moment of blankness, a moment of no thoughts, a moment of suspension, a moment of stepping out of time, and by the end of the first week, everyone raised their hand and said they'd experienced that at least once. So that's what happens when the transformation occurs.

So when we go into the void, what happens is we pick up new filters, and we come back from the area that knows only truth, and we come back out, and then it's possible for us to create a new body. Well, not right away. But how do you think? How do you think? Because when I was in Orlando, Florida, and I'm sitting in Orlando, and Shannon calls me from L.A., and she said, you know, the lump that was in my breast, she said it disappeared on the plane flight home in two hours.

And I'm like totally blown away by that. And this was probably 1992. It took me a while to figure that out. Okay, you want to look at a specific process of healing. Let's look at a specific process of healing and use this as an example.

A number of people have approached me about eyesight, so let's talk about eyesight for a minute. First of all, if our nervous system is holographic, then our vision has to be holographic. Gotta be. So if our vision is holographic, then vision is a metaphor for what? How you deal with life.

And there's two things the way you deal with life. You outer and you inner. You go outward and you go inward, and that's how you deal with life. You can see this in the metaprograms. The most evident one is information processing, but frame of reference, attention direction, all of those deal with whether you're outering or entering.

Extrovert, introvert, all of those deal with that. The second thing is that you see with much more than your eyes. If our nervous system is holographic, then we see with much more than our eyes. And I've got to tell you something. We do see with much more than our eyes.

And I've actually sat... I have a friend in Los Angeles whose kids attended a training in Mexico City. And she brought her kids to see me. And they put cotton swabs over their eyes, big cotton balls, the size of golf balls over their eyes, and they wrapped their heads with ace bandages, these little boys. And you'd give the boys a magazine and they would read to you with their eyes taped up and an ace bandage over it.

They would read to you from the magazine. Now they wouldn't read, I'm sorry, they wouldn't read small print. But they would be able to read the headlines on advertising. And the way they would do it is, with their eyes totally taped up, is they would actually move their hands back and forth rapidly over the page. I've seen them do this.

And I'm very skeptical, and these guys had their eyes ace bandaged up. Cotton balls over their eyes, ace bandaged all the way around the head, but just a little breathing place for their nose to where they couldn't see. You hold the magazine out like this even, so it's right in front of their eyes so they can't see it, definitely. They can't look down through the ace bandage. And you have them hold their hands up and go back and forth across the thing, and they can read you.

They can tell you it's a picture of a car. They can tell you the color of the car. They can tell you the words that are on the page. Got to tell you something. So when somebody comes to me and says, oh, my eyes aren't working so good, I go, okay, no problem.

You don't even need eyes to be able to see. Eyes are just, I think eyes are actually a genetic sort of fluke. And here we've got a few things that look like eyes. But if we didn't have eyes, you'd be seeing out of somewhere else. Oh, many of you are, yeah.

Okay, so vision then, what is vision then? If you see in without eyes, what's vision? Vision's a cybernetic process. And defective vision is a result of a defective, here, here, think about... You know the saying we've got, perception is projection?

Remember that? Perception is projection. You've heard that, right, in psychology? You can't possibly see other than who you are. Let's take nearsightedness as an example.

Let's take nearsightedness as an example. Nearsightedness may be a coping mechanism for your projection of who you are in the same way as pain is a coping mechanism in an injury or fever is a coping mechanism in the flu. When you go to an eye doctor, the eye doctor is going to test primarily your foveal vision. The eye doctor, by the way, looks at peripheral vision when doing eyeglasses, but they correct the foveal vision. And those of you who wear glasses, and by the way, I used to wear glasses.

I wore glasses from my sophomore year in college until about 10 years ago when I decided, using NLP techniques, that I didn't want to wear them anymore. So I used some NLP techniques and don't wear glasses anymore. And the last time I was tested, I was 20-20 in one eye and 20-30 in the other. So those of us that wear glasses, those of us that used to wear glasses and those of you that still wear glasses, you need to know that the glasses themselves, first of all, the eyeglasses correct only your foveal part of your vision, not the peripheral part. So essentially they tend to bring the sharp center part of your vision into clear focus.

And it's kind of neat when they correct your eyes clearer than what they were. But clearer than what they were is actually a misnomer. They make the central part of your vision clearer, but it reduces the peripheral and is possibly reducing the healing experience. And when, I don't know if you've ever done this, but when you have eyeglasses on, try looking beyond the frame. Or do you look beyond the frame?

We're certainly less clear in peripheral vision with framed eyeglasses. Our eye movement is reduced, and if our eye movement is reduced, you remember what we talked about in the strategy part of this training, we talked about synesthesias. If the eyeglasses themselves reduce your synesthesias, then they reduce your experience of life, since synesthesias are a key to our experience. Taken together, they reduce our experience of life and they reduce our healing resources. Jacob Lieberman, who's an eye doctor and also a PhD, in the book Take Off Your Glasses and See, says that a client who goes to an eye doctor for eyeglasses and is then put in eyeglasses for the rest of his life, or her life, is almost like going for a broken arm for going to a medical doctor and the medical doctor says you're going to leave the splint on for the rest of your life.

What would you think if you went to a medical doctor and they put a splint on your arm and they left the splint on for the rest of your life, how much usage would you have of your arm after a while? So why do eye doctors then put on glasses and you wear them the rest of your life and then they tell you you're going to have to come back in six months because your eyes will get weaker. Six months? So if our prescription gets worse and worse every six months, what's the prognosis? Think about it.

It's great. It's great marketing. And by the way, I'm not opposed to eye doctors. I think there are many really good eye doctors. In fact, a number of people have gone to eye doctors, and the eye doctors have said, you don't need to wear glasses, you should just do eye exercises.

So there are some eye doctors who actually do that. All right, so let's look at the psychological issues of what is nearsightedness. Nearsightedness is short-sightedness. It's getting away from the world. It's trying to get away from the world, making it so not to see the world.

So what's the issue? The issue is it's not safe to project yourself. And it's not okay to see. Usually, in all the work that I've done with eyesight, and I've done a lot of work with eyesight, in fact, this is really bizarre, I worked with this one woman who had glasses and she was blind in one eye. When I met with her, and I'm in Seattle with her husband, sitting in the room, listening to the therapy.

We get all done, and we're doing timeline therapy, we get rid of the significant emotional event that caused the eyesight to be, caused one of the eyes to be blind and clear up the other eyesight. And she gets all done and she opens her eyes and she starts yelling, I can see, I can see. And her husband is, I looked at her and she was just fine. And her husband was freaking out. So anyway, she goes across to the window and reads the sign on a building across the street that I was kind of like going, whoa, that's pretty good, squinting my eyes to see.

So usually, a client that has eyeglasses usually has a significant emotional experience, and often it has to do with school. But not always, and it often has to do with the need to be logical and detailed in trying to get it right, which is what? Foveal vision. Foveal vision. Dr.

Lieberman essentially says that there are three things which will intensify visual deterioration. And the first thing he lists is eyeglasses. Now this guy is an eye doctor. Doctor of optometry. He says the first thing that will intensify visual deterioration is eyeglasses.

The second is social norms that encourage it. Social norms include as you get older your eyes will get weaker. You've heard that. Have you ever heard that? That's not true, by the way.

It's not true. Especially if you continue to use your eyes in the same way that you've used your eyes when you were a kid. And where do your eyes go when you're a kid? They go everywhere. They go all over the place.

And kids will roll their eyes and do strange things and bug their eyes out. And do all kinds of weird things. And we go, don't do that. How do you think you look? And then we get, oh, the kids go, oh, okay.

So then their eyes, then they have to have their eyes act sanely. But in fact, why do you think kids bug their eyes out and do all that stuff? Maybe those are eye exercises. Look, mom. Maybe what we should say is, good boy.

So, the third thing is educational stress. So he says eyeglasses, social norms that encourage it, and educational stress. So try this on. Try this on. Eyeglasses, how many people here who have eyeglasses, did you ever put them on because you felt like you were more protected?

Anybody feel more protected? I certainly did. When I first put on, when I first put on my first pair of eyeglasses, I felt, whoa, this is cool. And then I got those ones that go dark automatically with the light. Slightly tinted lenses so you can be majorly cool.

It's true. It's true. So what is that? That's unwilling to be outer. Remember we said eyesight is about outering and also about entering.

So outering is what you project to the world. And entering is insight. Entering is insight. So the insight is the willingness to go to the peripheral or willing to go beyond the boundaries, going outside the foveal to the peripheral. The inner part of vision is the insight.

And a lot of vision happens in the insight. A lot of vision happens inside the self. A lot of vision happens as we are incited. Or as we look inside, A lot of it happens inside. The image that comes to you is upside down.

And who could say, I mean, the image that comes into your eyeball is totally upside down, and what happens is your brain corrects it anyway. You know that, right? So why do we see things right side up? Huh. So your whole brain is going to change it anyway.

To sum up the issue of eyesight and also I think maybe perhaps to sum up the issue of healing, if I may, and then we'll talk about how to clear up your eyesight. Phineas Parkhurst Quimby. You know who Phineas Parkhurst Quimby was, don't you? Or do you? Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, you probably don't remember who he was.

He's not a major hero in the United States, but he was one of the great healers. He lived approximately in 1860. And when I tell you what he did, you'll know who he was. He was the guy that healed Mary Baker Eddy. And Mary Baker Eddy created Christian science from being healed by Phineas Parkhurst Quimby.

And Phineas Parkhurst Quimby said in the book written by Julius Dresser, which is essentially the Quimby manuscripts published around 1860. It's a blue book, still in print with Dover Publications. Phineas Parkhur's Quimby says, when I heal someone, I need to overcome two things, an unreasonable faith in science and an unreasonable faith in religion, which essentially says an over-dependency on the scientific approach and an over-dependency on a religious approach. And essentially, Quimby said, healing begins in the mind. And all of his cures were essentially mental cures.

So Quimby said, I need to overcome an unreasonable faith in science and an unreasonable faith in religion. Meaning essentially that unreasonably thinking that science is going to solve the problem. And also unreasonably thinking that religion will solve the problem. But essentially, Quimby said, looking for a cure that begins in the mind because he said essentially all cures begin in the mind. Okay, so how would you clear up eyesight?

I would, this is what I've done with clients in the past. first of all, suggest them to take off their contact lenses because contact lenses block, even if they're gas permeable, block the oxygen from the eye. And the first thing to do is to reduce the prescription that you've got in your eyeglasses or get rid of them entirely if you possibly can. The next thing is to get supportive beliefs, beliefs about it being okay to see clearly and okay to outer yourself and also okay to see clearly. And probably you also ought to let go of any of the causative issues of that mentally, which includes timeline therapy or whatever approach you choose to use to let go of whatever caused it. I think that eye exercises are important.

Eye exercises are important. You need to strengthen the muscles that control the eyes. And the client himself or herself needs to access more neurology of healing, which means essentially peripheral vision, and or any other techniques that expand the consciousness. The International Vision Training Center in San Francisco San Diego, which has, since I modeled their eyesight process, has disappeared. I'm not sure where they are.

One of the things that they always also felt was important was having energy going into the eyes, and so they suggested sunning the eyes, not looking at the sun, but sunning the eyes in direct sunlight so that the sun fell on the eyes, but you're not looking at it, Which essentially is heat or fire. Palming is also another way to do it. You know how to do palming? You rub your hands together like this. Palms together, and then you put the palms over your eyes like that and allow the heat from your hands to go into the eyeball.

Heolani meditation, meditation on the light. How many people here felt your eyesight was much clearer when you did that meditation that night? Anybody? Personally, I find that every time I do that, I really feel like my eyesight clears. Just meditating on the inner light.

Practice hakala, or peripheral vision. Practice seeing holographically. Those are essentially the techniques, and personally I've had a lot of really good luck with eyesight. I hope to be able to demonstrate some work with eyesight during the next segments which are coming up. Okay, so that's our little tour de force of eyesight from a quantum point of view.

And what I'd like to say as we conclude this part of the training, if you look at slide 45, we begin with the proposition that you're infinite in scope, in your neurology, which essentially says that no matter what you think you are, you're always more than that. That reality is a construction and that reality and meaning are created through relationships. Perception is learned. Remember that? Living is learning and perception is learned.

And everything and everyone is interconnected. When there's a problem, when you know it, you've put up boundaries. When there's a problem and you know the problem, put that in quotes, you put up boundaries. Because when you know that there's a problem, you also know, by putting up the boundaries, you also must define what is not. And essentially we end up with boundaries.

One of the questions we asked on slide number 44 is what is it that you need to not know to know this? So think about that in terms of healing. Think about that in terms of healing. Because the process of NLP and timeline therapy and hypnosis are essentially for the purpose of allowing us to experience this. That is, the boundary is essentially disappearing.

The boundary boundaries essentially disappearing and us experiencing the wholeness of who we are. So when you're ready, I want to suggest that you could accept a few presuppositions. We're looking at slide number 31. You'll remember this. First of all, the issue of cause and effect.

That I am intimately connected with and affect the entire world around me. And that everything is created in the now, and of course we can transcend time. If we move beyond the notion of an objective world, we can get that we're intimately connected to all that there is. You don't have to know everything. You don't have to know everything.

And remember that confusion precedes a higher level of order. Your nervous system is holographic and complete as it is. And everything and everyone is totally and intimately connected. Carl Prebram said your nervous system is a hologram of the universe. And so as you consider what you've learned in this master practitioner training, consider this, that at any moment when you think about it, no matter who you think you are, you're always more than that.

So when Milton Erickson awoke the next morning inside the boiler factory, the first thing he heard was all of the workers. And they were saying, how in the world do you think you can communicate? How does he think he, in such a short time, can learn how to communicate deeply like this inside? And of course, Erickson knew that he'd learned something really, really valuable. He knew that he'd learned something that he would carry with him for the rest of his life.

Because I think he was always putting himself in situations where he would develop his consciousness and his neurology simply by putting himself in those situations. Mr. Wright got the message a little too late. He thought it was the drug cribyosin rather than his own unconscious mind that was going to heal him. But we can learn by his point of view.

We can learn by those things that he himself missed. And essentially it is that you have at your disposal a wonderful healing machine, device, system, network, hologram, which is your nervous system and your unconscious mind. If you take one thing away with you, that would be it. Because there are a lot of different ways to teach NLP, and this is just one of them, as I mentioned on the first day. This is just one way to look at NLP.

For me, and I hope for you, there have been times during this training when you had to reach back, Like the time when you stepped up to the board, you know. Like that, and you went like this. Just like that. Just like that. Now, I don't know why you'd consider doing that.

But, you know, the best part about that was that you guys didn't even have to think about that. You guys didn't even have to think about reaching down inside. Or maybe, yeah, maybe you did. Maybe you did actually consider doing that. So as you think about it, and you're perhaps on your way, not yet, but perhaps in a few days, remember that there will be times, from time to time, when we're called upon to reach back.

Like for me, I got off the volcano, and I was so cold that I was sure I had hypothermia. My feet were numb. My legs were actually... Have you ever had hypothermia? I don't know.

My legs were feeling kind of all tingly. And as I rode in the van back down from the volcano, I shook, shivered for an hour while I was getting warm. Of course, we rented one of those Hawaii vans. It's one of those big island vans that had no heater. Well, you don't need a heater on the big island, except for that day.

But it reminded me of, actually, when they flipped open the door of the Inipi. Now, I took a breath of that cool air, and I went, oh, man. I'm out of here. I made it. I made it.

Because I really thought I was going to die. I really did. I really did. But as I think back on it, I'm really convinced that if you don't have something like that that comes up for you at least on a regular basis, that you're probably not investing enough to think about that for just a minute. Because our life is about investing, I think, something for something.

And one of the things that One of the things that's up for me, of course, is beginning to think, like, what to do. Maybe you're thinking about that now as you realize we're about to finish this tape set. But here's the plan. If you actually changed your beliefs, and your beliefs have changed, and you've actually changed what's real in your mind, then probably that's going to change your focus. Probably.

Probably. And if your focus changes, then you'll probably begin to think, hey, some of these things that I used to do, I'm not sure if I want to do those, but I'm sure that there are some things I want to do. As you remember, I told you the first day Erickson was big on focus. So as your beliefs change, as what you believe is real change, as your commitment to cause and effect changes, then maybe you're going to look around for just a moment to stop and go, what in the world? Yeah, no, that's it.

What in the world? What in the world? What in the world are we going to do about this? And I hope that at that moment, when you begin to think about the issue of maybe sharing some of this with the world, that you'll begin to hear something in the back of your mind. And as you hear that thing in the back of your mind, maybe your foot will start tapping.

And as your foot starts tapping, you may just let the feeling run all the way up your leg. It comes all the way up through the right or left side of your body and then out your mouth, and you begin to say, hey, let's talk, because I've got something to tell you. This is really important. And then whatever you say will be perfect, because you'll be feeling that it's time to, I think, begin to look at making a difference in the people's lives and the planet. And that'll make people happy.

So you hear this little happy tune running in your mind. Doesn't that just make you grin? It just makes you smile and feel real good. So as you go on your way, I hope you take all the good feelings and a desire to perhaps give this back and to share what you've learned with the rest of the world. All of this material that you've learned I think will be expanded if you just stop and think about giving it away.

Because if you're really sure that you want to give it away, because that's what I do, is I just take it, and I just put it out there as quickly as I can, and just give it away. And that starts all over again. And just like this piece of music, what happens is it'll go on forever. So if I had one hope, it would be that, that this whole thing would go on forever. Remember one thing.

You are the Buddha. You're the flower. I am the sap. Before we complete, and this is completion, I want to acknowledge Donna Morabito and Susan Chu, especially Susan Chu and Donna Morabito, who had very profound effects in assisting me in putting together this material. I want to thank the people that went before me and began to think about this material, which was John Overdurf and Julia Silverthorne, as well as all the other people in my life who have affected me, including Richard Bandler and John Grinder and Wyatt Woodsmall and all of the folks in NLP who had some sort of particle or part to play in putting all of this together.

And, of course, I want to thank all of those folks who were instrumental in development of these thoughts. And, of course, all of you guys on the tapes, because now you're the people on the tapes instead of the people who were on the tapes. And as you think of that... Ah, well, never mind. This is the end of Tape 28, Side B.