# Body, Presupp, Metaphors, Remedial Vs Generative Change, Pattern Intterupt

What other presuppositions do you like? Any others? Yeah? Mind and body affect each other. We talked about that earlier, didn't we?

About neurotransmitter being present in every, or bathing every single cell of the human body. Now we have the proof, although missed earlier on by science, what's happening is we're coming full circle. And what I notice is that there's more and more, regularly I notice more and more people who are coming to NLP from the traditional medical field and from the traditional therapeutic field who are looking for the presuppositions that we have in NLP as assisting them and guiding them in what they're doing. So mind and body affect each other. I had a client call me, this is a very funny story.

She called me from Kauai and she goes, I have asthma, can you help me? I said, sure, sure, let me just ask you a couple questions before we make an appointment. Do you smoke? And she said, not really. I went, not really?

What does this mean, not really? So I said, well, what do you smoke? She said, well, I just smoke a little marijuana. How much? Well, she said, never more than two or three joints a day.

So I said, well, okay. So before we, you know, before we do the intervention for asthma, I'm going to suggest that you stop smoking. And she said, well, wait a minute. She said, I thought you were this great mental healer. Well, there's two things I object to that.

One is, of course, that I don't do anything. I'm just a tour guide. And the other thing is that mind and body are interconnected. So I said to her, you know, we honestly believe that mind and body are interconnected. And so if you're going to, because I said, there's as much tar in three marijuana cigarettes as there is in a whole pack of regular old cigarettes.

So I said, I'm going to suggest that you stop smoking marijuana before I actually see you. Or that would be a separate intervention. So I said, when you're ready to do that, just give me a call. Because she said, well, I don't want to give up marijuana, I just want to get rid of my asthma. Interesting.

So yeah, mind and body are interconnected, and a lot of people don't think they are. So we're going to ask people to actually make changes. I think we also have to realize that what you put in your body affects your mind. What you put in your mind affects your body. We're clear about that from the point of view of thinking, which most people aren't, but we're also clear of that from the point of view of the thought processes that we use.

So you can't put something in this quantum mechanical device that doesn't affect the whole of the quantum mechanical device, thus producing certain results physiologically. Okay, what else? Any other presuppositions you like? Any other favorites? Okay, excellent.

So this is just a little tour de force as we begin our master practitioner training, just sort of a look at some of the presuppositions that are inherent in what it is that we're doing. I think we're on the verge of a whole new way of looking at who the human being is in NLP. I think we've been doing this in neuro-linguistic programming since 1975, 1974, somewhere in there. And I think that we've begun to take the promise of what Alfred Korzybski suggested with the entire description of someone from a process, from a holy process point of view. And I think it took quantum physics to give us the rest of the story.

I think it took quantum physics, quantum biology to give us the rest of the story. So there's a couple of basic presuppositions that I'd like you to consider as we go through the training from this point of view. And that is that your focus determines your results. Your focus determines your results. And what you believe to be real is real.

What you believe to be real is real. But if you change your beliefs, or you change your beliefs about what's real, then you change your reality. If you change your beliefs about what's real, you change your reality. There's an example of this, I must say, in the Psychobiology of Mind-Body Healing by Ernest Rossi, 1986. Rossi actually talks about a cancer patient named Mr.

Wright who believed that he would live, totally believed that he would live. And the one thing that kept him alive, and according to, this was actually written up in the Journal of the American Medical Association around 1957. And it's about, the doctor said, of course, he changed the name. Wright was not actually the guy's real name. But he said that Mr.

Wright was a cancer patient, and he believed that there would be a drug invented that would totally save him, and the drug crebiosin was invented. And when they invented the drug crebiosin, they thought it was the cure for cancer, by the way, and they did some tests in hospitals throughout the nation. And so when Mr. Wright received his first injections of crebiosin, the doctor said he remembered giving him the injections and giving him the instructions for the rest of the weekend, and Then he went home for the weekend. And when he came back, he said, Mr.

Wright, on Monday, he said Mr. Wright was up out of his hospital bed. Now the interesting thing about Wright was he was on oxygen and they thought he had less than three months to live. And on Monday morning when the doctor came back, Mr. Wright was up out of his bed, walking around, telling everybody the wonders of cubism.

And so the doctor hurried to examine him, and he said the tumors seemed to actually have lessened themselves. Wright had tumors, and they'd metastasized even to his lungs. So he was really in bad shape, and the fact that he was up out of bed talking to people and telling them how great it was was an indication. The doctor thought, well, this is really great, so he hurriedly went to examine all the other patients, and, of course, he found no change in the other patients. Well, not of course, but looking back on it, curbiozine didn't actually work, except for Mr.

Wright. So after about three months, Mr. Wright took to flying his private plane again. I don't know anything about private planes, but one of his major hobbies was to fly his private plane at 12,000 feet, which at 12,000 feet there's not much oxygen, and his plane didn't have an oxygen system. So the doctor took that to mean that Wright was cured, and now we're six months out in the program, and all of a sudden the American Medical Association announces that crubiozin may not be working.

And Wright called the hospital in a panic, said, what's up? And three days later he was back in the hospital and his tumors had reformed. So the doctor said, well, then I decided to try something which under normal circumstances I wouldn't. He said, I gave Mr. Wright injections of pure distilled water.

And I told him it was a new improved prebiose and the old one hadn't worked because of the shelf life. And he said, once again, Mr. Wright's tumors melted, and he said, and I quote, like snowballs on a hot stove. And within a matter of weeks, Wright was back to flying his private plane again. And then, the blow, the major blow, the American Medical Association announced that crebiasm was totally worthless in the treatment of cancer.

And within three days, Wright was back in the hospital, and he died. Now, what's important about that story from our point of view is that when Wright believed he would live and when he was given something that allowed his unconscious mind to heal himself, then he did. See, and the important thing from our point of view, if you're listening to these tapes or sitting here in the room, you have as much power in you for healing at the unconscious level as Mr. Wright did. The difference is we're going to show you how to actualize that.

We're going to show you how to actualize that healing power at the unconscious level. And the way to do that, and we're going to come full circle again to exactly the same question I asked you earlier, which is what is it that allows us to make the mind-body connection? What is it that would allow us to actualize and be able to connect with the mind-body connection? And, of course, we said it was the unconscious mind. We said it was the unconscious mind.

Erickson said the unconscious mind is like a warehouse of resources. The unconscious mind is like a storehouse, a warehouse of resources. And he said the problem is that most people go into that warehouse of resources with a little flashlight. Instead of turning on all of the lights in the warehouse, most people go on in there with a little flashlight. Erickson was very big at learning how to make these connections at the unconscious level.

He thought it was very important to allow the unconscious mind to make the connections at the unconscious level that would allow you to tap into those resources. In fact, he was always putting himself in positions where he would have to do this. You may have heard this story before, but I think it bears repeating, that one day Erickson was walking down the street in the town where he lived. And he heard from over there somewhere a noise, and he looked up at the sign and it said, so-and-so boiler factory. You may have heard this before, but I want you to know I always use this metaphor when I teach.

And he went across the street and he went into the boiler factory. And as he went into the boiler factory, you know, one of the first things that attracted him was the noise. There was a tremendous amount of noise coming from inside. He went across the street and went into the boiler factory. And as he went into the, he could grab the door in his hand and he felt the tug of the door in his hand and his feeling of his feet as they crossed the threshold.

And when the door closed behind him, the light changed. Because the boiler factory wasn't lit really well inside. It was mostly lit by molten steel. So as he went inside, the light changed. And it took him a while for his eyes to become accustomed to the light inside the boiler factory.

But as his eyes became accustomed to the light, he looked around and he saw workers. And the workers were doing things purposefully. They were. They were purposeful. But he looked at them and he noticed they were communicating with each other and he couldn't hear them.

So he stopped one of the workers and he said, I want you to get me the boss. Can you ask the boss to come outside? So the boss comes outside and Erickson said, I'm learning about learning about how to communicate at the unconscious level. The boss said, okay. I guess in those days things were different.

Because Erickson said, I'd like to sleep here for the night. And the boss said, okay. So Erickson went home and he got his pillow and his blanket and came back. Once again crossing the street, he could hear the tremendous amount of noise. Gra grabs the door in his hand, feels the tug of the door in his hand as he goes inside, and as the door closes behind him, once again the light changes.

When his eyes become accustomed to the light, he sees the workers again, and they're going about their business purposefully, and he realizes again he can't hear them because there's so much noise inside. So he finds a place, he found a place out of the way. He said, I found a place out of the way where I could sort of lay down and go to sleep. So he laid out his pillow and his blanket. He said, as I laid down to go to sleep that evening, he said, the noise was still pounding in my head.

He said, but long about midnight, he said, I managed to take all of the noise and put it outside of my head. He said, and then I fell asleep. Erickson was always putting himself in circumstances where he would have to learn by making new neurological connections. He would always put himself in a circumstance where he'd have to learn something by the state that he was in, or by being forced to learn something, or by having to reach back and pull out resources that he didn't know was there. So he was always very, very big on not only changing your focus, but also being in situations where you had to learn something just on account of being there.

Now, think about this for just a minute. Because I'd like to go back and quote Pribram, Carl Pribram, who said, if the nervous system, if the storage of memory is holographic, then what is it a hologram of? The universe. So if your nervous system is essentially universal and holographic, then wouldn't it be possible to connect to the infinite resources of the entire universe through the unconscious mind? Because we're not going to do it consciously.

Because whatever you think you are, you're always more than that. So what we're going to do, soon, but not yet, is we're going to get into a situation where you have to trust your unconscious mind in order to do the next exercise. And it's probably going to be something you weren't sure if you could do. By the way, I hope that we have a number of times together during this training where you have to do that. I want to warn you in advance that there are portions of this training which are constructed in that way.

There are portions of this training that are constructed in that way where we'll give you a minimum of information and you'll have to trust your unconscious mind to come up with the answers. The only thing is I don't think we'll tell you in advance which exercises those are. Because if your unconscious mind didn't know which ones they were, it would have to do it all the time. So there is a great opportunity here for you to reach back inside and just notice what's there. And I don't know, whatever you wrote down on your outcomes, you know, and whatever you're going to put on your outcome obstacle thing to break through as you look at your outcomes.

Consider this notion. Consider the notion that whatever you think you are, you're more than that. In fact, not just Pribram, but the entire history of mankind is filled with people telling us that we have at our disposal all of the resources that we need. Throughout the history of mankind, there have been people who've told us that we are infinite in scope and capability. And my great hope as we begin this Master Practitioner Training, it took me a while to get here.

It took you a while to get here, too. I mean it to this point. My great hope as we begin this master practitioner training is that we all together get in touch with that. So that's where we begin. Okay, questions.

Are there any questions about what we just covered? Yes. Can you tell me about stroke victims and the neurology that you were talking about with how this would affect a stroke victim? If you have a stroke and they lose part of their ability to, say, talk, walk, they're paralyzed on one side, they get some of it back, I know they've worked with them, then they lose it again, another stroke. Is it possible to totally regenerate this entire being that we have again and have these people walk, talk, just like they were?

Yeah. So here's the theory. You know, I don't know if you remember the old days. When they had a stroke victim in the old days, they used to put them to bed. They put somebody who had a stroke to bed for six months.

And what they found out was that the person doesn't regenerate function. So today, when a person has a stroke, they get them up and they get them doing things right away. So the first rule of thumb with the neurology, with the entire human body, is use it or lose it. So if I can get someone who's had a stroke early on, very, very early on when they had it, then I'm very optimistic about making change. What it requires is that the neural networks get reworked.

So I'll give you an example. I worked with a woman who couldn't raise her arm. So we got done, and she raised her arm up fully. On the other hand, there was... I've also worked with a fellow who I saw seven years after a surfing accident.

And in the surfing accident, he fractured his C5, but it acted like a C3 accident. So he became quadriplegic. And when I first met him, he did not have volitional movement of any of his limbs. After the first session, he moved his toes for the first time in seven years with volition. That is, he could move his toes and know that he was moving them and chose to move them.

Now, it's been about four years since I worked with him. And two years ago, he actually, or two and a half years ago, he actually got out of bed the first time. This is Keith. You guys know Keith. He actually got out of bed the first time Without any help.

So he was very happy about that. He's not walking yet. He would like to. He's still working on it. But my rule of thumb is the longer the person's had the condition, the longer it may take to reverse it.

Because the neurology tends to set in. So if you can get somebody very, very quickly, then you can make a difference. And the analogy I like is the analogy of the phone system. So we have a great phone system in the United States. And if I was going to make a call from Los Angeles to New York, but it was supposed to go through Chicago, but Chicago was out, it wouldn't matter.

You wouldn't know if Chicago, the switching station disappeared from Chicago. Because you could go south to San Diego and then over to El Paso and then to Dallas and then New Orleans and then up through Atlanta and then to New York. Or you could go north to Vancouver and then across to Calgary and Edmonton and then to Montreal and then south to New York, right? You would never know if the phones were out. I mean, the switching station in Chicago, you'd never know if it was out.

So our neurology with 10 to 10 to the 11th possible neurological connections is like that. So that's how I think about it. And in order to do that, you need to use timeline therapy to get rid of the trauma and you need to use hypnosis to rework the neurology and get the person back on track. That's what I do. And we've had some luck with it, you know, some change.

Some things have occurred. But I think the thing to think of is that the nervous system is a wonderful, wonderful, totally unlimited, exquisite quantum mechanical device with so many possibilities that you can't even conceive of how many possibilities there are in the human nervous system. And even you, of conceiving of your own, whatever you conceive, limits the nervous system by its conception. So that the results, the possibilities are totally infinite in terms of what one could do. When you're working with someone, say, like a stroke victim, obviously you have to relate to the unconscious.

Can you, in a sense, or are you, in a sense, talking on a cellular level? Is it just the unconscious? You're talking about all the cells in the body have this memory. Right. So is this what you're trying to reach, or are you...

Yes. And you're also working with the neurons to make... to arborize new neurological connections. Dr. Goodwin talks about it as the activated neural networks. And so what we've got to do is, if a certain set of neural networks got sort of gummed up with a stroke, what we have to do is we have to make new networks to go in different directions.

And we are working on the cellular level, which is why I always use hypnosis when working with neurological things. So I also add in the hypnosis. But it's not so much the cellular level, although there are memories in each of the cells. It's also the neurology that we want to rework because if you could think of it like connections everywhere, like a phone system. We want to get the message to go from where it was going because that path is no longer available to somewhere else.

And what I told this fellow that I worked with that had the surfing accident was, I said, you know, your phone message doesn't even have to go through Texas or even through Vancouver. It could go through satellite. And his unconscious mind kind of liked that, that you go through a satellite connection. But my experience is that the longer someone's had a condition, the longer it may take to get rid of it. So that's the key.

And then what you use is everything you know, and primarily the NLP, timeline therapy, and hypnosis to rework it. By the time we finish this segment, you'll have pretty much a good idea of how to do that kind of intervention. And we'll talk about that. Yes? You said before that what you don't use in the body you lose, right?

The rule of thumb is use it or lose it, yeah. Right. So if you have an internal organ that's removed, the neurological patterns just eventually die because they don't have any place to go to? Well, that was interesting because I worked once with a woman who had her thyroid removed, and I said to her, could you imagine growing a new thyroid? And she said, sure.

I said, or could you, this was actually three different choices I gave her, could you grow a new thyroid, or could your body secrete the hormone from where the thyroid was? Or could your body act as though it was? And she was on thyroid medicine and working with her doctor in the first week after doing that intervention she reduced her need to take thyroid medicine by 50%. So there was clearly a measurable difference in just giving her those choices. Now, when an organ is removed, then what happens is that eventually the neurological connections that were present to work with it disappear.

But there's also the story which Deepak Chopra talks about, about a guy who had a heart transplant. And he had this heart transplant and then all of a sudden began to think of drinking a lot of beer. And I'm only going to give you part of the story, but he began to think of drinking a lot of beer and come to find out the guy whose heart he got was a real heavy beer drinker. And so he began to pick up some of the neurology of that. So not only does the old neurology begin to go, but if you put something new in its place, the new neurology will be there.

Whoa. Even if it's just a thought. Sure. The thought of drinking beer for this person. The new heart was transplanted into someone else, and the new person, the new recipient of the heart, also had the point of view of drinking beer.

So every cell in the body carries the memory of the whole. Isn't that interesting? Well, so the question is, energetically, the organ is still there. It may or may not be still there, but the longer the person is without it, it won't be there, because the neurology will begin to... The lights in neurology will sort of begin to go out.

So over time, it'll just sort of go... and then it won't be there. Over time. That's why, with regards to this fellow that had the surfing accident, I saw him seven years later, not the next week. So I knew that there was something that we needed to do about at least, and perhaps it was just change my beliefs, or perhaps it was change his beliefs about what's possible. But generally my experience is the rule of thumb is the longer a person's had the condition, the less activated the neural networks will be and the longer it may take to reverse it.

At least in terms of neurology now. We're just talking about neurology right now. The question is, is it true of vision improvement? We've been able to do some very, we'll actually get into vision improvement in this training. We've had some very good luck with vision improvement.

And the thing about vision is that the eyes are controlled by a muscle. So if the eyes are controlled by a muscle, then all we need to do is rework the muscles. Right? Okay. So let's talk about the difference.

So this leads us to the issue of change, and I think it's a perfect place to talk about this. It leads us to the issue of remedial versus generative change. We're looking at slide number 14. There are two, essentially two kinds of change. You obviously know which one we're talking about in NLP.

In a remedial change, the person is broken and they need to be fixed. And when you're done, the problem's gone. In generative change, the person is okay. And if we simply install curiosity, what'll happen is the person will adapt and will essentially pay attention to process rather than content. So in generative change, what we do is we install something for which the process causes them to continue to change.

And when we get to our timeline therapy segment, we'll look at a specific set of techniques for questioning that will allow us to make sure that each time we do that, we'll be working with generative change. Of course, I think that generative change is probably referred to remedial change. I don't know where you guys are at with that, but personally I would say that, that, I mean, we can certainly do remedial change, anybody can do remedial change, you can fix the problem. The question is, how is that going to generalize through time in the future and for the person? So mostly what we're paying attention to as we do NLP is this notion of generative change.

At least that's my good idea. And I want to mention one other thing about neurolinguistics and then we're going to move on to the notion of language. We'll actually get into the beginnings of our content of this training. The other thing I'd like to mention is the notion of the pattern interrupt. And we're looking at slide number 15.

Any pattern that a person has can be interrupted. In fact, if you interrupt a behavior early enough on in a pattern, the behavior, the interrupt will get linked to the pattern and become part of the pattern. So this is another, this is another unspoken presupposition of NLP. If we can link the interrupt to the pattern, the interrupt becomes part of the pattern, and then the pattern doesn't run. So a lot of what we do is about that.

A lot of what we do is about that. Yes, question. Have I ever had the experience where I attempted to do an interrupt, and the interrupt was not sufficient, so it anchored the behavior? Have you had that experience? Oh, good.

Actually, if the interrupt is sufficient and early enough on in the behavior, it will interrupt the behavior. The issue is how soon into the behavior can you do the interrupt. That's really going to be the main issue. So the minute you recognize the behavior, if you interrupt the behavior, then the interrupt will become linked to the interrupt, will actually interrupt the behavior rather than installing it. Whereas, later on, if the behavior is actually run through quite a ways, then it's possible that...

So you want to catch the strategy early on, is what I'm saying. Logical levels of therapy, which we're going to discuss and go over together during this training. Logical levels of therapy is an example of interrupting a pattern. And we'll actually go through that and learn how to do that. So a lot of NLP techniques are specifically about that.

Specifically about that. Tomorrow, we're going to actually look at the basis of all NLP patterns and how NLP works, but this is one of the major concepts in how that happens. This is the end of Tape 3, Side A.