# Transitions In, Strategy To Select, 6 Areas For Elicitation Of

So let's just jump right down to the transition of values on page 325. Yes, question, Linda. Question is, does this apply to the hierarchy of values that a person goes through in their lifetime as well? What the theory essentially says is that people grow and evolve and their values change and generally people's values tend to move in this direction from values level 2 to 3 to 4 to 5 to 6 to 7, 8 and so forth. One of the things that was important to me and I don't want to get too deeply into the content of it because I'm mostly interested in change.

Remember we said when we said metaprograms, this is NLP, what we're interested in is how do you elicit them, but also how do you change them. We're also interested in how do you change values. It seems to me, however, that there's going to be certain issues that a person is dealing with at a certain values level. I don't know if you remember your own life, but probably you've changed your values a few times. What Claire Graves would say is it's not that you solved any of the problems that you had, it's just that the problems became obsolete as new coping mechanisms and new interests came into play.

So I don't know if you remember the problems that you wrestled with when you were younger, but notice if those problems were ever really solved for you, or if they just became meaningless as you took on new perspectives and new ideas and faced in new directions. That's what, that's essentially what Graves would say is what happened. So this particular transition of values is based on my working with and discussing these issues with a guy named Chuck Spisano. Chuck is a PhD family counselor who lives in Honolulu. And Chuck worked in drug abuse counseling in Los Angeles, and at that point they had values level two, three, four, and 5, which were almost the same as Graves, and this was about the same time that Graves worked, and so I'm not really sure if he was, sort of, if his ideas were fertilized by Graves or whatever, but this is sort of, this is sort of the idea, and the feeling is that, that what I'd like to do is share with you what gets you from one values level to the next so that you could assist a client in transitioning from moving through certain values levels if it was an issue.

Here's where values levels become an issue. If a client comes to you and says, I was a very successful life insurance salesperson, making two, three hundred thousand dollars a year, and now I'm not, and you give him the values test, or you ask him what's important to him, and you begin to pick up some values, level six values, you would probably not serve him to change his values back to level five. You would serve him to change his values to values level seven. Because it's quite possible that he'll make that much money with values level seven, but it's also quite certain that he probably won't make that much money at values level six. Does that make sense?

Yes? Values level six is save the whales, ban the bomb, watch out for ecology. So someone at values level six is not going to be interested in, to be honest with you, selling $3 million or $6 million of life insurance per year. Probably. I mean, could be, but I'm guessing.

So what we've got here then is we've got transitions. So let's look and see what the transitions might be. Values level two needs to let go of victim. And what gets you to the next level is embracing understanding. Values level three needs to let go of hurt and rejection.

And what gets you to the next level is self-acceptance. Actually, the more you know the values levels, what you'll see is some of these things are actually right on. Values level four needs to let go of guilt and unworthiness, and what gets you to the next level is forgiveness. Values level five needs to let go of unfulfilled expectations. Totally going with the flow will get values level five to the next level.

Values level six needs to give up control. Whoa. And peace, faith, and trust gets you to the next level. Values level six needs to give up control. Whoa.

And peace, faith, faith and trust gets you to the next level. Values level seven needs to let go of roles and duties and making commitments about, and also experiencing the ability to give and receive. Moves you to the next level. Values level eight needs to let go of societal expectations. And what gets the person to the next level is letting go and being a leader.

Values level 9 is what is letting, to get from values level 9 to transition out of that, you need to let go of fear of power, and what gets you to the next level is feeling the power and being it, and then values level 10 needs to let go of fear of sharing the power. There are some postulations about values levels 11, 12, and 13, which, according to this system, are roughly equivalent to the three states of enlightenment that Maharishi Mahesh Yogi describes as being states of enlightenment. So from that point of view, my guess is that you would not see any clients at those values levels because I don't think they would describe what they were going through as problems, which is why the transitions aren't in there and the issues aren't particularly there. So what you're going to be seeing is people moving from one values level to the next. And so this, as well as your understanding of, and having read the chapter on Claire Graves in the book Timeline Therapy, as well as if you want to go and read any of his material, certainly all of that would broaden your understanding about values.

And I think I've said enough here about it. I just wanted to make sure that, that, that you understand my point of view, which is if a client comes to you at, I mean, a client who comes to you at values level four, okay? And the way you can spot somebody like that is you say, what are you doing? He says, well, I've worked for the, I've worked for, you know, the company all my life, and now I feel like I deserve to strike out on my own and be, you know, an entrepreneur, but I'm really feeling like I'm not worthy to do that. That's a, that would be a real good description of somebody at values level, at values level four who might come to you for, who would need some assistance at that.

They'd be very simple, assist them in letting go of guilt and unworthiness and do install some forgiveness-ish things in their timeline, which would be sort of like people are doing the best they can with the resources they have available. And then shifting the values for this person would assist them in moving into a transition. And the values you'd want to shift is sort of career values. So the reason we cover this is so that you have an idea of what direction a person is moving in so that when you evaluate the request that they give you for change work, that you're going to be evaluating it in the context of how the person will transition anyway. Okay?

So let's see how values are organized inside the individual. Let's talk about that just a little bit. And we're going to be looking at slide number 144, but there's also a diagram of this on page 323. The metaphor that I used, or the analogy that I used in the timeline therapy on the basis of personality was like a little cup hook. Do you remember that from the...

And to me it's kind of like the cup hook itself is the value and the beliefs are hooked onto it, kind of like... So what happens is if you have a value, that there's a bunch of beliefs that are clustered around that value. This became very evident to me personally when I was doing the modeling project that I mentioned earlier during our modeling tape section of the salesperson. And what we did is we elicited a number of his beliefs around the issue of selling and then found that each of his beliefs was clustered around a certain value. The way we got to that is we said, what's important about believing this?

And then we went and identified the value, or what's important to you about this, and then we went and identified the value in the hierarchy. So typically what's going to happen is, is that you've got a, a value, and the value at the very top of this diagram is going to be an ends value. Maybe this is the number one value for the person here. And around that, there are going to be some beliefs. And then if there's a belief, or a value that leads to that and clustered around that, some beliefs.

And then another value that leads to that and clustered around around that some beliefs. And if you look at page 323, the value, the values in the middle are going to be means values, actually the lower values are going to be means values, and then the final value at the top is going to be ends values. If the values lead to some other value, then it's going to be a means value, otherwise it will be an ends value. And notice that the beliefs are clustered around the value. What's interesting about that is you can see that if you have a client with a bunch of disenabling beliefs that are clustered around a value, you can see that if, what happens if you take out the value?

The beliefs just go. And, um, that is also my experience in working with clients. So that's the second reason why I don't work directly with beliefs. The first reason I don't work directly with beliefs is because we can work with them using timeline therapy. It's usually a little smoother to take into account the atemporal or the temporal creation of them, sorry.

And if you're going to work with values, you're going to affect a large number of beliefs anyway. So personally, personally I'm going to be, I'm going to be working with values. Let's look at page 319. So we handle the issue of how, we handle the issue of how beliefs and values interact, right? Does everyone understand how beliefs and values interact?

Okay, let's talk about how strategies and values interact. One of the things I asked, I ask a lot of, when I was, I'm glad I didn't train myself in NLP. I'm looking at slide number 145. Because one of the things I asked the trainer when we were covering strategies was, what's the strategy that selects all the other strategies? And he said, shut up.

And to me, I think what I'd like to point out to you is that the strategy that selects the other strategies, at least in terms of those, those strategies that end in K, or kinesthetic, like, for example, the motivation strategy, the strategy that selects the motivation strategy is the value. The strategy that selects the motivation strategy is the value. Or to put it another way, if we have down at the bottom of this diagram a, a strategy, which is whatever it is, you know, step number one, step number two, step number three, leading to motivation at the bottom of this diagram, then always, and without exception, this third box, and you might want to put a K in there, the third box has to be K. You understand that the end of actually a motivation strategy has to be a kinesthetic because motivation is a kinesthetic. So the final K here, just before motivation, is going to be a kinesthetic, and that kinesthetic is linked to a visual, which is the value, or a picture of a value, which is a VK synesthesia.

The value itself is structured as a VK synesthesia, and that's on page 319. The V there represents a visual, or a picture, and that picture is linked to the kinesthetic. And interestingly enough, the kinesthetic that comes off of the value is going to be the same kinesthetic that ends the motivation strategy. Now, would you guys like to play and see how that works? Because this is the most instructional thing about how values relate to motivation that I've ever seen.

Okay, so let's play for a minute. If you guys are ready, and if you're listening to the tapes, on the other hand, if you're actually driving in your car, you may not want to do this. You probably want to save this for later. So let's, while we're here in the room, can you remember a time that you were totally motivated? So can you go back, please, and remember a time when you were totally motivated.

Remember a time when you were totally motivated. Can you go right back to that time now, step right into your body, see what you saw, hear what you heard, and feel the feelings of being totally motivated. Okay, and then nod when you're there. Good. Good, okay.

All right. Now, what I'd like you to do is I'd like you to run the strategy up until you get the feeling. Now, if you're in the feeling of motivation, wind it backwards slightly until you get the feeling right before that. Wind it backwards slightly until you get the feeling right before that. So just take that strategy and wind it backwards until you get the name of the feeling right before that.

Jean, what's the name of the feeling right before that? You're not there yet? Okay, so let's do it together. So you remember a time when you were totally motivated? Yes.

Do you remember a specific time? Yes. As you go back to that time now, please float. Go right back in the past, float down into your body and see what you saw, hear what you heard, and feel the feelings of being totally motivated. Now rewind that strategy slightly and tell me what was the feeling that occurred just before you were totally motivated.

Just give me a name. I was very satisfied. Satisfied. Okay, good. So that's the feeling.

Okay? That's the name of the feeling for Jean. Has everyone else got the name of the feeling? Okay, now here's what I'd like you to do, if you want to play. What I'd like you to do is I'd like you to consider the context in which this occurred.

Okay? Stay right in the state. I'd like you to consider the context in which this occurred. The context in which you were at the time when you were totally motivated. Okay?

And I'd like you to ask yourself, what's important to me about this? So, Jean, let's do this together. So, what context did this occur? It was in convention. Okay.

And I was asked by the president of the company to manage more of his own personal business. Okay. So, in that context, it's a business context, right? Yes. Yeah.

Okay. Now, the next thing you're going to do is you're going to ask yourself, what's important to me about that in this context? If you already have a pretty high values level, like for Jean, it was satisfaction, that's a high enough level of abstraction. Okay? And what you want to do then is, but if you have a feeling, then ask yourself, what's important to me about that feeling?

If you have a feeling, then ask yourself, what's important to me about that feeling? And notice if you have a picture. So John, you don't need to do that. You've already got a high enough level of abstraction. So let me just ask you, do you have a picture when you think of, in the context of business, when you think of satisfaction, do you have a picture?

Yeah. Good. Stay right there. I don't need to know about it. Okay, so just get, what I want you to do is get yourself a picture of the feeling.

Get yourself a picture that represents that feeling. So ask yourself, in this context, when I consider how important this is to me, do I have a feeling? Okay, now what I want you to do right now, then, is I want you to take that picture, John, and make it small and dark and stick it right up there on the wall. Make it the size of a postage stamp, step out of it, and put it right up there on the wall. Would you all do that?

Just make that picture, shrink it down, make it small and dark, and put it right up on the speaker. You've got the feeling at the end. You're going to ask yourself, in this context, what's important to me about that? And when you get what's important to you about that, then you're going to ask yourself, do I have a picture of that? So, Jean, let me ask you a question.

Jean, let me ask you a question. Clear the screen. Okay. Okay. You got your picture up on the wall?

Small and dark like a poster stamp? Yes. So tell me about that feeling of motivation. Tell me about that event now. Does that motivate you anymore?

Not the same way than before. Not at all? It's like flat. Flat, yeah. Okay, Jean, let's do it together.

Okay. So, Joe, remember a time when you're totally motivated? Yes. Can you remember a specific time? Yes.

Go back to that time, please. Mm-hmm. Float down into your body, see what you saw, hear what you heard, feel what you felt. Mm-hmm. Now you've got the feeling of motivation.

Mm-hmm. Wind it backwards until you come up with the feeling that occurred just before that. We're doing a strategy elicitation right now, aren't we? Okay, we'll get the strategy elicitation, okay? What's the name of that feeling?

Anticipation. Anticipation. What's the context? When I was graduating. In the context of education, is anticipation...

Graduation. I was graduating. What's the bigger context? I'm thinking graduation day. It was education.

So in the context of your personal growth and development in your life, how important is anticipation to you? In the context of education, how important is anticipation to you? Well, it's something I look forward to. So it's important to you? Yeah.

It is, okay. When you think of anticipation in that context, do you have a picture? Mm-hmm. Can you take that picture and shrink it down and make it small and dark and put it up on the wall? Right up there.

Put it right up on the wall there. Okay, just leave it there. Clear the screen. Okay, now tell me about that event. Is it motivating to you now?

No. It's not, is it? No. Okay, did you all successfully do that exercise with me? Okay, we'll get it back in just a minute.

We'll get it back in just a minute. I just want to do a show of hands. Is there anyone in the room for whom the motivating event is now more motivating than it was before? Yeah. Usually in a group about this size, there's usually one or two percent of people who will find it more motivating.

But notice that for everyone else, the motivation disappeared. Now, we went through a motivation strategy. We went through a motivation strategy. We asked you to get the strategy. Now, how important then do you think that running that strategy will be to you in the future if we left it this way?

We're going to put it back, I promise. But how, like Matthew, did you do the exercise? Would you be, I mean, are you motivated by that event anymore? No. Is there any motivation at all?

Yeah, but nowhere near as much. Would you be, would you be, like, would you be doing it at this point? So you wouldn't do the behavior anymore? Or you wouldn't do that event? It wouldn't motivate me.

Yeah, the event wouldn't be as motivating to you? Yeah. Right. Okay, so what this does is I think it gives us the link between motivation, which, by the way, is what? Produces a lot of our behavior, because you're not going to do something probably that you're not motivated to do.

I noticed that my motivation strategy was an away-from-strategy of panic. When I was purchasing a house and the deal wasn't going quite right, so it was a last-minute thing, and I had to intercede. In the context of... Winning. Yeah, wait, no.

In the context of... This was your personal life, right? Yeah. In the context of your personal life, how important is it to you to... What?

To win? No, panic, actually. What's important to you? So winning was what's important to you? Yeah.

Right? And it's panic that causes you to know that it's time to win, right? Yeah. Okay. So in your personal life, how important is winning to you?

Extremely important. Good. So did you take that and shrink it down and make it small and dark and put it up there on the wall? Yeah. Now how motivating is that event now?

It's not. It's not. Yeah. What this does is it gives us a real clear example ourselves of the relationship between the kinesthetic and the value. And the kinesthetic, here's what's important about this.

The kinesthetic and the value is the same kinesthetic that drives the kinesthetic on the motivation strategy. Do you all understand that? It's linked together. The kinesthetic in the value is linked. It's the same kinesthetic that's in the motivation strategy.

So the kinesthetic and the value is what causes us to run the motivation strategy. Okay, let's put them back. Okay, let's, y'all, let's put them back so everybody's, unless you choose not to, it's up to you. But if you want to put it back, let's go ahead and put it back. Please take the picture, bring it back to the size that it was.

Same size, same shape. You all remember the size, et cetera. Bring it back off the wall, put it back, same size you were associated, step into it if not. Have it be exactly the same size, location, et cetera, all the same submodalities. When you're all done, clear the screen.

We'll give it a moment here. Good. Now, Joe, let me just ask you a question. Let's go back and see, does that event motivate you now when you go back and remember the event? Yeah.

Yeah. Yeah. John, does that event go back and does that motivate you now? Yeah. Matthew, does that event motivate you now?

Yeah. And... I left mine there there. You didn't want to do the panic thing. Okay.

All right, David. Thank you very much. Yeah, yeah. Anytime, anytime. If I can be of assistance, just let me know.

So here's the deal. This was a simple exercise. The only thing we're trying to do is find out, hey, how do values affect motivation strategies? What we get is that it's that kinesthetic, the kinesthetic is coming off the V, so a value is a V case anesthesia. Its importance is controlled by what?

The importance of the value is controlled by the submodalities of the value, because we change the submodalities and the K disappeared, right? We change the location, well, we change a lot of stuff. We changed the brightness, location, I asked you to step out, picture, etc. So the importance of the value is controlled by the location, by the submodalities of the value, and it's a VK synesthesia when we change the location of the value, the kinesthetic dropped out and the motivation strategy became less important. So will values, will values assist us in changing people's lives from the point of view of if a person doesn't want to do something, like they say, I'm motivated to take drugs, for example, if we take out the value that causes that to occur, will the motivation strategy disappear?

Yes, it will. And that will take out a whole bunch of strategies related to that, that that value fires off those strategies. So those, so those strategies will all go. So it won't be just a single strategy. It'll be a whole bunch of strategies that we can take out because probably your values and your motivation strategy are cross-linked, that there's a lot of different links that occur or that go together on that.

I'm confused because I don't see where the value comes in. What value are we working with there? I can see how the strategy, we had a strategy, visual. I saw something and I felt something and I was motivated. How we got to the value, Joe, was that what I did was I asked you for context.

I said, what's the context? And you gave me context. Right. And then I said, and is that important to you in that context? You said yes.

Oh, okay. Okay. And then, so the visual itself became, so by changing the visual, the kinesthetic disappeared. Right. Want to do another one, just so you know?

Okay. Just for fun. Okay. Okay. Just for fun.

Just for fun. I only do things for fun. Okay. Okay. So can you remember a time when you were totally motivated?

Yeah. Good. What's the context? First day walking through the gates at Walt Disney World, Or Magic Kingdom. So what's the context?

Fun. Magic Kingdom. Walt Disney World. I'm not really sure what you're saying. What's the bigger context?

Fun. Enjoyment. Bigger than that. Laughter. Like major life's context.

Having time off. Taking vacations. Relationship. Time Time with my daughter, relationship. So family.

A lot of things were tied, yeah, family. Family, okay. So the context is family. Yeah. Great.

Can you remember, can you go back to that time now? Go right back to that time. Specifically, you're walking through the gates, you feel thehmm. Okay, what was the feeling that occurred right before that? Again, anticipation.

Good. In the context of family, is anticipation important to you? Yeah. It is, isn't it? Yeah.

Okay. So can you, as you think of that importance of anticipation, do you have a picture? Now, I've actually, without being obvious about it, I've asked him to think of anticipations. I'm not actually eliciting the strategy. Whatever he does will probably work, but I've shifted the context slightly by asking him, when he thinks of anticipation, does he have a picture in that context?

Good. Can you take that picture and make it small and dark and put it in exactly the same place as you did before? I'd rather not to. No, but just for fun. Yeah, just for fun.

Just for fun. And make it small and dark and put it up there and step out of it so you see your body in the picture? Great. Clear the screen. We'll get it back in just a minute.

Oh, okay. Is that popcorn? No, I don't think so. So, Joe, when you think of that event, is it motivating now? No.

By the way, Joe's looking up at the wall for the picture. He's going, where's the picture? I'll make sure it's still there. Did you take it? No.

So in the context of family, let me just ask you a question. In the context of family, is it motivating to take your family to Walt Disney World? It ought to be. Is it right now? No, not really.

So have we changed Joe's motivation? If he took his family to Walt Disney World a lot, have we changed that? Notice how much he wants it, by the way. Okay, Joe, bring it back. Take the picture.

Bring it back so it's exactly the same size, brightness, et cetera. If it was associated, you're in it. Joe feels much better now. And he fixed himself, so. That's right.

That's right. So, Joe, can you remember now going to Walt? How's that? Oh, yeah. Is it motivating again?

Oh, yeah. I want to go back. Yeah, he's jumping. He's jumping. Joe's jumping up and down.

So you all can see, even from Joe sitting there in the room, you can see the differences in his behavior and his tone. You can hear his difference in his tone of voice when the thing is up there. Now, what we did is we did a subtle shift. So I wasn't being immediately obvious, but it's a fun thing to do, is we did a subtle shift, and the shift was when you think of that feeling, we got the context. So when you think of the context of family, is anticipation important to you?

He goes, yes. And you say, so when you think of that, do you have a picture? By the way, this is not an intervention, so the whole intervention is not on your tapes. The purpose of going through this is for you personally, so that you can have a direct feeling and experience of how important values are in terms of selecting strategies. Joe was not even motivated in the context of family to take his family to Walt Disney World when we took out the importance of anticipation in that context of family, to take his family to Walt Disney World, when we took out the importance of anticipation in that context.

Do all values end with K? All motivation strategies end with K, because motivation's a feeling. So every time you have a motivation strategy, the last step in it's going to be a kinesthetic. And the motivation, like I said, is directly cross-linked, directly cross-linked to the kinesthetic that comes off the VK synesthesia of the value. So a value is what?

A value is a VK synesthesia, which is directly cross-linked to motivation. So that's what values are. And values, the importance of values is controlled by the submodalities of those values themselves. So each value is going to have a certain set of submodalities which causes it to be, in a sense, important to us. What's really interesting to me is that a value is simply a VK synesthesia, which the synesthesia is controlled by the submodality location of the value.

So when these political parties get up and they go, well, we're the party with values. Like the other party doesn't have values, right? We're the only ones that have values in this campaign. Oh, really? Like, for example, when the head of the Republican Party called me up from the state of Hawaii, which, as we say in Hawaii, is no big thing because the state of Hawaii has not gone Republican.

Hawaii is like so democratic it isn't funny. But anyway, the head of the Republican Party called me and he says, you know, Tad, he says, one of the problems, you know, is that people don't have any values. And what I said to him was, sir, I would submit that they have values, they're just not the same as yours. Everyone has values. So for someone to claim that there are no values or that there are this values or that values, I think is kind of silly because everyone has values and this is how they're structured at the unconscious level.

Now whether the values are good or bad or right or wrong, that's a different issue. Okay, so the first thing we want to do is we want to elicit values. And we're going to look at page 318. And so the very first thing we do is we're going to elicit a client's values. We could elicit it in the context of working if you're eliciting it in terms of career.

If you're not eliciting it in terms of career, you're going to ask the client what's important to you about a relationship, what's important to you about family, what's important to you about... And I think personally that probably we ought to be eliciting values in any one of six contexts. It seems to me that values are most effective when elicited contextually. And the wizard in The Secret of Creating Your Future told Mylon that probably that there were six areas of life that one ought to be paying attention to for the values to be aligned and for the life to be balanced. So let's go, let's see what the six areas are.

The first is, and these are not in order of importance, the first is business or career. First is business or career. You may want to write these down. The second one is family. Third is relationships.

Fourth is personal growth and development. Fifth is health and fitness. And the sixth is spirituality. And that chart is at the bottom of page 327. So if you want to look at it, it's at the bottom of page 327.

Okay. So what's the first thing we want to do? First thing we want to do is find out what the client's values are. Pretty simple, right? What are the client's values?

And how do we find out what the client's values are? Ask them. And what do you ask them? What's important to you about something? Now, here's the thing.

We go through, and the first thing we want to ask is, what's important to you about X, whatever that is, and you're going to get probably, what, three, four, maybe three, four sets of values. Three, four words. Five, six. Some clients will give you even up to eight. You want to go in this particular elicitation, when you're doing a values elicitation at the master practitioner level, you want to go at least three times.

Let me tell you how it'll go. Say to the client, what's important to you in your career? Let's say we're doing a business application. What's important to your career? The client will say, you know, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and then you'll go, and they'll stop.

Those are usually surface-level values, okay? Those are usually surface-level values. Those are the values that are in consciousness right away, so you want to ask the client again. So you want to ask him, what else is important to you about that? What else is important to you about that?

And so the client goes, well, blah, blah, blah, blah. So you write those down. Okay, now you've got two sets. For purposes of this, you want to go at least until they've run out a third time. They may say, oh, there's no more, in which case that's fine.

Or you want to go until you have seven or eight values. But probably you want to get as many as you can and go until the client really is complete and they've said all they need to say. My theory is that oftentimes there are very high level values in the second or third part of that elicitation. So go at least until you get three times, and each, when you get the third time, you could be done, if the client, if it seems like the client has more, then just ask them again until they really are complete. And again, the theory is that sometimes at the deeper level there are values that may have a greater importance that are not immediately available in that first run-through.

Okay, so that's the first thing. Here's what I'd like to do. We're going to do three different, we're going to elicit values in three different ways. So what I what I'd like to do with your permission is I'd like to teach the first one, which I just did, and then demonstrate it. And I'd like to teach the second one, and then demonstrate it, and I'd like to teach the third one, and then demonstrate it, and I'd like that all of us will do an exercise.

So rather than splitting it up into three exercises, I'd like to teach it, demo it, teach it, demo it, teach it, demo it, and then do an exercise. Is that all right with everyone? Yeah? Okay. This is the end of Tape 23, Side B.