# Introduction, Communication Model, Learning State

Welcome to Advanced Neurodynamics NLP Master Practitioner Training. You are in for a really wonderful experience as you join us for this live training. As you join us, perhaps you could imagine you are right with us in the training. Now let's join Dr. Tad James live in Kona.

All right, welcome. This is our NLP Master Practitioner Training, and I want to welcome you guys to Kona. If you're listening on the tapes, welcome. What I want to say is that this is, I think this is real exciting for me because what I do is I get to teach an entire Master practitioner training, and I get to share with you some of my thoughts about NLP, of which I haven't done an entire one of these for a while. So I get to re-look at the content and really once again get into it.

And there are some things I think which are very important about neuro-linguistic programming which are not immediately obvious. So what I'd like to do, if I may, oh, and I want to warn you about something. Can I, can I, can I, can I share something? I want to confess something. Can I share something with you?

Beware of the guy that sits in the trainer's chair. Okay, because he has an, I just want to tell you right now, he has an ulterior motive. He has an ulterior motive and he's doing this stuff on purpose. And so here's what I figured. I figured I could either teach NLP or I could transform people.

So I decided to. So be careful of the guy who sits up there because when he talks to you, don't tell anybody. He has ulterior motives and what he wants to do is he wants to transform you. I just want to warn you about that up front. Okay.

Let me just go back there. Hi. Welcome to our Master Practitioner Training. My name is Tad. And you know who you are.

So I'd like to share some things with you by way of introduction to our NLP Master Practitioner Training that may not be immediately obvious but are clearly presupposed by neuro-linguistic programming. And I also, at the same time, would like to chat with you a little bit about what is this thing that we're getting into the second level of. Because most everyone here listening to these tapes probably have at least listened to our practitioner level tapes or taken a practitioner training and y'all have taken a practitioner that's a word by the way y'all it's a Texas word but I borrowed it y'all have taken a practitioner training and so by now you probably ought to know something about what is this thing that we're learning. Did you ever, since the time you took the training, did anybody ever ask you, what is this NLP stuff anyway? And did you have an, you did, someone did.

And did you have an adequate answer? It took me a couple, I gotta tell you something. My mother, of course, bless her heart, she's 85, my mother has no idea what I do. She says, Tad, what do you do? I say, Mom, I'm an NLP trainer.

She goes, NLP. What is that? So let's see if we can figure out what to say about this thing that we're studying, first of all. I mean, that would be a good place to start, wouldn't it? What in the world is it?

So let's look at section one, page two. What in the world is this thing that we are looking at that we actually think that we want to become certified in? No, really! And how in the world can we explain it to somebody where we actually say, yeah, neuro... People say, NLP, what's that?

You go, it's neuro-linguistic programming. And they go, see, that's even worse, right? That's even worse. They go, what? Neuro...

Yeah, and then it's all downhill from there. So I figure, let's figure out, let's figure out what we want to say to people. So, page one, two. Of course, the standard explanation is, the standard explanation is that NLP is, well, it's the study of the nervous system and how the nervous system operates, which includes the mind, through which our experience is processed through five senses. And linguistic, of course, refers to what we do inside our head.

So that's language and other nonverbal communication through which our internal representations or our neural representations are coded, ordered, and given meaning. And that includes pictures, sounds, feelings, tastes, and smells, and the words. See, we add one thing on for the internal dialogue, which is self-talk. And programming is the ability to discover and use the programs that we run as we communicate to self or others. But that's a long explanation, isn't it?

Isn't it? It's a very long... In other words, let's try this on. Let's see how this works. NLP is how to use the language of the mind to consistently achieve our specific and desired outcomes.

That's a little better, isn't it? That's a little better. But let's look at page three. I mean, what is NLP really? What is NLP really?

It's been described as an attitude and a methodology that leaves behind a trail of techniques. What does that mean? It means that all NLP master practitioners have an attitude. Murray's going, yep, they do, they do. Watch out, Murray, you're next, buddy.

So what is the attitude? What is the attitude? The attitude is curiosity. That's a good state. The attitude is curiosity.

Kind of like, you know, when somebody comes to you and they're exhibiting behaviors that don't look like they're really the kind of behaviors that you would do. No judgment here, but, you know, like, maybe I wouldn't do some of those things, right? And the curiosity is, rather than going, God, that's a weird behavior, the curiosity is, how can someone do that? How can they produce that behavior? It's such an interesting behavior.

How in the world do they do that? And then, the attitude is also a willingness to experiment. A willingness to discover, what happens if we do this inside? Or what happens if we do that. So the attitude that, which if I could give you a gift for this training, that would just automatically be installed in your unconscious mind.

I'm not going to suggest that. Would be an attitude of curiosity and a willingness to experiment and discover what in the world is going on. What's happening here, and what can we do, if we want to, to change that. The methodology, because we're not just talking about an attitude, but we're also talking about a methodology, and the methodology is modeling. And in this tape set, we'll actually get into modeling, and my experience is that in a reasonable amount of time, we can actually install that in you.

Modeling is an extremely powerful process. It's the process by which all of NLP was created. So together, my intention is that you'll at least be able to do intuitive sorts of modeling, discovering a person's strategy, their filter patterns, their physiology, and install that in yourself, and then intuitively be able to do the behaviors. That's really useful. All of NLP was created through modeling.

And we'll discover how it was created and what the process of denominalization is. Denominalization means taking a pre-existing concept and turning it back into a process. All of NLP was created this way. For example, rapport. Common concept in neuro-linguistic programming.

Before NLP, where was rapport? It was in hypnosis. I don't know if you've ever read any books on hypnosis. I have. I've read probably about 260, I think.

I collect old hypnosis books. And I think I've got about 260 on my shelf. And the process of rapport was never mentioned in the books. Even in the old books, they go, and even Erickson said, anything is possible in the presence of a good rapport, but never explained what it was or how to get there. So what NLP said is, okay, what is this magical, mystical state?

By the way, rapport in hypnosis is defined as that state where the client sees only the hypnotherapist and has only a conversation with only the hypnotherapist and accepts the suggestions of the hypnotherapist. What NLP said was, why don't we take that issue of rapport and make it into a process that anybody can do and we'll discover how to get there. So what they did was they took tapes of Erickson, noticed he was matching and mirroring people. Erickson would sit the same way they sat. He actually did not have full range of movement of the lower part of his body, but the upper part of his body would almost always be matching and mirroring him.

Or if he needed to, he would be actually pacing their breathing with his finger, which today we call crossover mirroring. So he'd actually be pacing the, the breathing of the client with his finger. Now, when we noticed that in an LP, what we did is we turned it into a process. So, taking the notion of rapport, we said, okay, what's the process by which people can gain rapport? So we'll We'll be looking at a lot of processes during this training.

We'll actually be looking at how do we do something in a way that actually produces the results. And then, of course, the methodology, I think, also includes continual experimentation. Just a willingness to try stuff on yourself and notice if what you're trying on works. And then also a willingness to find out if it works in someone else. And for me, modeling has been a very powerful process to learn because it's the process by which I created all of our HUNA trainings.

So those of you who are here from having taken some of our HUNA trainings, NLP modeling techniques were the means that I used, or the methodology that I used, to actually turn around and say, okay, here's some pre-existing concepts in HUNA. How do we turn those back into processes? Or how do we turn those into things that people can learn easily? And that, that was how all of NLP was created. It was created modeling a few people.

There were some folks who were modeled. And, and who were they? In the early days, they were Milton Erickson and Virginia Satir. Gregory Bateson was modeled a little bit for some of the languaging stuff, but primarily it was the work of, especially with the Milton model, of course that's where it came from, Milton Erickson, and the meta model came from Virginia Satir, so in the late 70s, mid to late 70s, most of the work was with those two people. And so a lot of very important and also very deep techniques came out of that, and so what the last part of it is is a trail of techniques.

By the way, my opinion is that the trail of techniques is the least important part of this training. We'll learn some techniques. We'll learn some techniques during this NLP Mastery Practitioner training. But if together you and I can change your attitude, I'm not going to suggest that. But if together you and I could change your attitude, and if together we could discover how to think, if we could change our thinking, and also learn or use a methodology that will actually do that, then what could happen is that we could discover our own techniques.

And again, that's where all of the HUNA training came from. That's where the timeline therapy, process of timeline therapy essentially came from, was really looking at how do people do things inside their heads and what happens if we make that into a technique. So modeling, and we'll get to a modeling in just a bit. So let's look at the model that is currently NLP to see if this will also help us explain what in the world it is that we're talking about here. And we're on page 1-4.

Here's our little person. You may have seen this person before. Actually, all of NLP is on this page, interestingly enough. What this model says is on the right side, if there's an external event that occurs, it goes through some filters. And the filters do the process of deleting, distorting, and generalizing.

So deletion is when something that was there is missing. Okay, So actually dropping out whole pieces of information. Distortion is when something that was there is changed. And the wonderful example in the East Indian metaphor is the notion of the rope lying on the road that looks to a man like a snake. That's distortion.

So he looks at the rope, he sees snake, he runs off and yells, snake, snake, snake, and they come back and find it's a piece of rope. That's a clear example of distortion. Generalization is when we take one thing and take it to mean many. So when we take one example and we say that's the way it's going to be, that's generalization. Those are the three processes that human beings do, naturally.

Those are three of the main processes that we as human beings do, and those tend to be what our filters do. Now, what are the filters? The filters are, first of all, our experience of time and space and matter and energy. That's sort of a quantum physics idea. Our filters are our language.

How many people here are multilingual? Anybody multilingual? And isn't the world a much different place when you're thinking in your other head or in your other language? Isn't it a much different place? Yeah.

So the language itself, the language that you speak, determines what you can and cannot think. Actually, Ludwig Wittgenstein was one of the first people to point this out in 1902. And he said, whereof one cannot think, thereof one cannot speak. So time, space, matter, energy, certainly language determines what we can and cannot think. It's interesting that in English there are some concepts that are available for flying airplanes.

It's not an accident that all of the language of airplane travel is English. I don't know if you know this, but there are virtually no concepts for airline travel in Arabic. So it's not by accident that the language of airline, it's not just because the United States invented or makes a bunch of airplanes. It's a matter of, or that the English, you know, made some airplanes. It's a matter of the language itself determining what concepts are and are not available.

So language is certainly one of the filters. And when we get into quantum linguistics, which is coming up almost immediately here, we get into our notion of quantum linguistics, we'll discover that language will actually not only determine how we think, but may even provide compartments or barriers to being able to think in certain ways, and which, if we cause those barriers to disappear, will open up our thinking and allow it to be expanded. Next is our memories. Our memories certainly make up a large portion of the filters. Memories often filter, along with the decisions that we make, often filter our opportunities.

I don't know those of you that have experienced timeline therapy. If you've experienced timeline therapy and you've experienced getting rid of a limiting decision, you may have noticed things that you didn't notice because of decisions that you made in the past that kept you from noticing opportunities. It's one of the major interventions that we use in expanding people's choices. So our our memories and our decisions filter our experience. Then, metaprograms.

Metaprograms are content-free filters, and we're actually going to discover what metaprograms are and how to elicit them. I remember once I was sitting in a business meeting with a branch manager of a bank who was looking at using us for doing hiring. And I was about 45 minutes into our presentation and noticed that she wasn't listening at all. And I went, yeah, I don't know if you've ever done one of those, but I've done a few. And she's sitting there absolutely not listening.

I went, huh. I said to her, you know, it occurs to me that this presentation isn't working at all. So let me show you what it is that I'm talking about. And in eight minutes, I elicited about 16 metaprograms, which you all will learn to do here in the next couple, actually next week week. And in eight minutes I elicited, just very conversationally, about 16 metaprograms and then spent the last 45 minutes of our meeting telling her about who she was in greater detail or in greater depth than anyone ever had.

And that was exciting. She actually decided that perhaps she'd be willing to look at our profiling system. So metaprograms are one of the filters. Metaprograms are content-free filters. For example, if I were to hold up this cup and there were some liquid in it, the question would be, is the cup half empty or half full?

It depends on what you focus on. And metaprograms are one of, are a determinant of focus. Actually, all of these filters determine our focus in one way or another. Values are next. Values are, values are a very, very abstract set of filters that have content.

And values are what's important to us. Values are a set of filters that have content. And values are what's important to us. They're at a quite deep level. Most of them are unconscious before taking a look at them.

Before we actually investigate our values, they're actually a quite deep, unconscious set of filters that we have. Values are how we evaluate our external world. And they are how we, how we evaluate whether or not what we've done is good or bad. And they also determine our, they also determine how we spend our time. Because I'll bet you that you're not going to do something that's not important to you.

So values. And then beliefs. And beliefs come off of values, or a result of our values. And beliefs are the rules that we have in our lives as to what we can accomplish, what we can do. Beliefs are what we believe to be true about the world, or believe to be not true.

Okay, so all of these things go through a bunch of filters and then we make an internal representation. And the internal representation that we make is intimately coupled with an internal, with the physiology by way of the internal state. So generally, and what is the internal representation made up of? You may want to write this on your, on page four. The internal representation is made up of V-A-K-O-G and A-D.

Pictures, sounds, feelings, taste and smell to a lesser extent. Thank you. Thank you.