[0.00 - 25.30]  Okay, other questions about interventions or order and sequence of therapy? We're looking at page 5.1, by the way. Ted, I was just a bit unclear on how you said to proceed with couples therapy. Did you say that you proceeded together or separately? Let's go over it. That particular family therapy model is on page 411.
[25.30 - 30.40]  This is covered in the Timeline Therapy Practitioner tape set, and so I'm just going to go over
[30.40 - 31.96]  a brief review.
[31.96 - 39.18]  Typically what I'll do with two people is I'll do two hours together, two hours each
[39.18 - 44.96]  separately, and two hours together, okay?
[44.96 - 45.56]  Two hours together, two hours each separately, and two hours together. Okay? Two hours together,
[46.06 - 47.26]  two hours each separately,
[47.86 - 49.84]  and two hours together,
[49.90 - 50.94]  which makes a total of eight hours.
[51.86 - 52.48]  It says here,
[52.56 - 54.82]  this model takes approximately eight to ten hours for a couple.
[54.94 - 56.44]  Add two hours for each additional person.
[57.44 - 58.92]  And from an LP point of view,
[58.98 - 60.70]  there are mainly two reasons why relationships
[60.70 - 62.20]  end either negative anchoring
[62.20 - 64.68]  and or unfulfilled strategies.
[85.60 - 90.68]  So what's presupposed here is we're going to clean up negative anchoring, delete negative anchors using timeline therapy, clean up any negative events. Practitioner can also do positive anchoring, have them remember positive states, and you can show them how to set their own anchor. That's how to clean up the negative anchoring. How to handle unfulfilled strategies includes metaprograms, the direction metaprogram, the frame convincer relationship metaprogram,
[91.20 - 95.58]  management direction, and timeline therapy techniques are all useful for handling that.
[96.08 - 97.54]  Values are also important.
[98.12 - 100.64]  We also go through love strategies with the client, all three,
[101.52 - 104.10]  and find out their primary representational system,
[104.80 - 105.62]  and then
[105.62 - 108.32]  the three new metaprograms.
[109.70 - 111.92]  The three new metaprograms we just went through
[111.92 - 114.60]  previously, which are
[114.60 - 115.96]  processing style
[115.96 - 118.26]  and listening
[118.26 - 122.14]  and speaking style.
[124.14 - 225.40]  Okay, so the first thing I do when working with a couple, as I say, is your marriage worth saving. Is it worth being married to your spouse? I think it's important to ask that every time you start a session. Because if the answer is no, you're wasting your time if you proceed. You need to say yes. And I think it's appropriate to start each time, it's appropriate to go through that each time you start a session. And then you want to discover their metaprograms and values and go through sort of a detailed description of what they want and then meet with them individually and do individual therapy. So you're going to get rid of negative anchors, get rid of any negative emotions that came up, and do parts integration and perhaps negotiation and check on whatever role models they had and then once you've done that page 413 you want to do the couple therapy have them together go through metaprograms tell them about the metaprograms you may want to talk about their timeline why one is late and the other is always on time values go through their love strategies and then set up and make agreements this is also very important So one thing I tell the couples is no double binds. They don't get to put each other in a double bind, and I explain what the double bind is. Like the wife who will say, why don't you be spontaneous sometime and send me flowers? So he sends flowers, and then she says, why can't you think of anything original yourself rather than me having to tell you? That's a real double bind, and that's not unusual, by the way. So he can't be spontaneous and send her flowers because she's already told him to be spontaneous, and he's not. So that's a double bind situation. Communication, we get them to agree on communicating to work out
[225.40 - 230.98]  problems, and we also agree that they're going to use generative supportive
[230.98 - 234.46]  systems or generative supportive situations. They're going to create all of
[234.46 - 239.22]  those in their relationship. And then we do anchoring, and we show them how to
[239.22 - 242.08]  handle negative anchors, which is essentially that you don't touch while
[242.08 - 269.04]  the other person's in a bad state. We give examples of how that works. We talk about positive anchoring, and then we show them how to re-anchor. We show them how to re-anchor to the positive states at the beginning of the relationship. And then we show them how to use anchors. Then we test in future pace, and then we're done. So that's the family therapy model. It works really well. I've had a lot of good results with it. Did that answer your question, Rebel?
[1168.04 - 1171.44]  Yeah? And it's two hours together, two hours each separately, which is for two people that's eight hours, and then two hours back together. Leave a couple hours leeway because you may run over in the individual session. All right, with that said, it's a perfect time to talk about values. And we're looking at page 315. Let's define a few things first. Values are what's important to us. So by definition, something you value is something that's important to you. Something which you value is something that's going to be important to you. And values actually do two things in our, in who we are. Or they do two things in creating who we are and what we do. The first thing that values actually do is they determine how we spend our time. Because you're not going to do something that's not important to you. In the class here we're also looking at slide number 141 and it does have some of those definitions on it. Values determine how we spend our time because my guess is, here's my guess, my guess is you're not going to do something that's not important to you. Now, you might do something that you don't want to do. You might do something you complain about, like paperwork or something like that. But you, my guess is that, my guess is that what you do is important to you. And the truth is, we're probably not going to do what's not important to us. So in one sense, values determine how we spend our time. Values actually determine how we spend our time. That's the first thing. The second thing that values do is they determine our evaluations about whether what we did was right or wrong, good or bad, etc. So, values are what's important to us and they do two things. They determine how we spend our time and they determine how we feel about self and others. The way values determine how we spend our time, does that happen before or after we do something? Before, that's right, before. And the way values work with how we feel about self and others, does that happen before or after we do something? After. So values determine what we do beforehand by what's important, and they determine how we feel about what we did after we do it. So those are the two functions that values perform inside of us. And if you look at our communication model on page 1-4, values are a reasonably, they're still pretty unconscious, but they're reasonably more conscious than, shall we say, metaprograms and our experience of language and time and space. And values are less conscious than beliefs. Or we should say values are more unconscious than beliefs. We're usually, as individuals, pretty much aware of what our beliefs are, aren't we? And if somebody says, well, can you do this? You go, no, I don't believe I can. So you're pretty much usually in touch with your beliefs. But oftentimes we're not in touch with what our values are. In NLP we talk about highly valued criteria and personally in putting together this segment on values and also in writing the book Timeline Therapy and the Basis of Personality, I stopped using the word criteria essentially because it's sort of jargonistic and the rest of the psychological world uses values to describe those things. So personally, I use the word values. And so if you're ever talking to anybody in the field of NLP who didn't study in our little branch of NLP with either people that we trained as trainers or myself, then you probably want to talk about criteria just so you guys can have a conversation with them. And highly valued criteria are our most important values. And just regular old criteria are, like the kind of criteria we have in a strategy, are what's important to us, generally values. What are beliefs? Beliefs are those convictions that we trust as being true. Beliefs are those convictions which we trust as being true. Beliefs generally tend to empower or disempower us, depending on the nature or quality of the belief, more so than values, in a sense that beliefs often determine what we can and cannot do, or what we believe about what we can and cannot do. And let's define attitudes, too. Attitudes we would define as collections of beliefs and values. So an attitude is a collection of beliefs and values around or about a certain subject. So in order to create an attitude, we collect a bunch of beliefs and we collect a bunch of values and that becomes our attitude. And we're usually pretty much, we're even more aware of our attitudes than we are usually of our beliefs. So in terms of unconscious to conscious, it's values, then beliefs, then attitudes. So personally I don't work with attitudes, because they're too conscious. Yeah? And I do very little work with beliefs, for a number of reasons. One of which is that, quite honestly, if you think about it, when a person has a belief, there was always a decision that preceded that belief. If you look at, in fact, it's right here on wall chart number 18. If you look at it carefully, you'll see. If this is a standard timeline with the future off here to the right, and now, and the past, if we have a belief which starts at some point, that we don't know what point it is, but somewhere, which is marked B. There must have happened at some time, and probably right before that belief occurred, a decision to have that belief, or a decision at least to accept that belief as being true. So personally, I work with the temporal aspect of beliefs, which is contained in the decisions that we have. So think about it for a minute. At some point in the past, think about any belief you have. At some point in the past, there was a time before which you had that belief. And, I mean, just pick any belief. There has to be a time in the past before which you did not have that belief. And the moment of your having that belief, sometime before the moment of having that belief, there has to be a decision, which is marked by the letter D on wall chart number 18, where you had that belief. So personally, for two reasons, I don't actually work with beliefs directly, except very, very occasionally to do the belief change process that we learned in the NLP practitioner training. I generally will work with the limiting decision or a decision that the client made to have the belief, or I'll work with values, and it'll become very evident here in just a moment why I would work with the values themselves rather than the beliefs. Let's go on and I'll get to that in just a moment. Let's just do two more definitions, core beliefs and values. And core beliefs and values are the basic values that form our personality. Those are often been talked about in NLP. Core beliefs and values are those values which form our personality, the deeper level values and beliefs. Personality, the deeper level values and beliefs that form our personality. And those are also called, without the word core, they're also called values and belief systems. So there are values and belief systems that exist inside the individual where certain values and beliefs interconnect and interact in a way as to produce certain personality traits. And how are values formed? According to the sociologist Dr. Morris Massey, the name of the book is People Puzzle, 1959, revised in 1965. Unfortunately, that book's out of print, but one of my great students, some of you remember Hugh Smith, gave me a copy of it. I was totally tickled. I'd been quoting it for years, and Hugh thought I ought to read it. No, I'm just kidding. I really did have a Xerox copy which I copied the book out of the library because it was out of print. Hugh actually gave me an original thank you. And in that book, the sociologist Dr. Morris Massey says that our personality is formed during three major periods of our life. And the imprint period from zero to seven where our personality is imprinted upon us like um little cookie cutters like her parents or or whoever we're brought up with is that sort of who we are is imprinted upon us and uh somewhere around around age seven but certainly by the age 10 the we begin to model people begin begin to model the people around us. And sometime along the way we then begin to become more of a social being and so some of our learning, some of our personalities begins to be formed after age fourteen and that's the socialization period. Massey, it's probably good actually now that now that I think about it, for those of you who are listening to the tapes, if you haven't read the section on values in the book Timeline Therapy and the Basis of Personality, you probably should before you actually proceed, because all of us here in class have read that. So if you're listening to the tapes, please stop the tapes and go ahead and read section four of Timeline Therapy and the Basis of Personality. And so we'll proceed. Massey also says that who we are is formed by significant emotional experiences that occur along the way. And these significant emotional experiences occur throughout our life, but that essentially creates who we are. William James adds in one other developmental period, by the way, which is 21 to 35, and from his point of view, that's when our business persona is formed. I don't know if those of you in business, if you go back and remember who were the people that were influential in being perhaps mentors or perhaps actually negative mentors for you as you first got into business. William James says that our business persona is formed from 21 to 35. So when you're looking at values, it's important I think to know the formation of values, at least when they're formed and where they come from is on page 316. Massey says that values come from a number of different areas, including family. And family values, of course, are not just values about family, but in the family itself. Values about relationships, about money, etc. And values are even formed unconsciously in the family family so even how your father related to your mother from in terms of physical distance etc. All of those are imprinted upon the little person from age zero to seven and form part of the structure of the individual's values. As you begin to go out and have friends, the friends influence us and our friends actually participate in the creation of values. The church or religion that you were brought up in influences your values and certain values about right or wrong especially. The school influences your values. Interestingly enough, even the, like, for example, the relationship of the teacher with her desk and how did she interact with the students, what were the ways she interacted with the students, that also influences your values. Geography influences your values. People from a certain area, is prosperity okay, et cetera. Of course, that brings us to economics. The economic times influence our values. One of the prime examples of economic times influencing values was those people who lived through the Depression. And I think that to a person, if you were to ask someone, and of course they're getting kind of rare now, but to a person, I think if you were to ask them what was very important to them, they would say that their children would have a better economic time than they did. So people that live through the Depression have very much of an economic issue to also, that helped to form their values. And of course media. Media are tremendously influential in the formation of values. Unfortunately, my personal point of view about media is I don't think we can expect them to be anything other than what they are. How Zen of me. And what they are is, what I think media are essentially is a reflection, unfortunately or fortunately, a reflection of the society that they are are in. So, if you look at your media and you're happy about them, well, or not happy about them, I think that unfortunately we can't expect our media to be anything other than a reflection of who we are as a society. So media also, and I don't know if you're aware of this, but if you haven't recently flipped on the television and watched something like MTV, then you probably ought to flip on MTV and watch, I think it would be real instructional if you haven't, you probably watch the top ten hits. VH1 is a little conservative. You probably ought to watch MTV if you haven't done this in 10 years. Or if you've never seen MTV and you're listening to these tapes, you probably want to stop, go to your cable guide, and turn on the television and spend three hours watching MTV, especially the top 40. No, I'm serious. I mean, if you're interested in the formation of values. Furthermore, if you're really interested in the formation of values, you probably ought to get on the internet because the internet is a brand new medium. And if you've never browsed with a worldwide web browser and you're wondering what your kids are doing at night, you probably ought to fire up a worldwide web browser and go to a website like Wired, which is very tame and conservative compared to a website like Wretch or, yeah. And there are some websites that are very, very strange and weird. So if you're interested in what the effects of media are and what's happening on the planet right now, probably what you need to know is their effects are way beyond what we even think, and they're unfortunately a reflection of who we are as a society.
[1172.62 - 1180.22]  And so I think all of those are interacting to form all of our values simultaneously.
[1180.72 - 1184.76]  In a more conservative sense, the major networks in the country where you live,
[1347.90 - 1365.10]  the kinds of shows they broadcast have an effect of changing values. The media, for example, during the Vietnam War, the Vietnam War was the first war that was covered by television. Putting pictures of the Vietnam War on television, it's generally agreed, changed the perception of war in the American public's point of view and shifted the values in the country more toward that being something that we're not particularly interested in. That lasted right up until the Gulf War, interestingly enough, when CNN was banned from actually providing live coverage by the U.S. government, from providing live coverage from the battle sites, and CNN was denied to do that, they said, because of military intelligence. Actually, what happened was the forces on the opposing side were watching CNN to find out where the troops were. So I think it's legitimate. On the other hand, I think we were denied live coverage of something which was possible, and I think would have also changed our point of view about that particular process. Morris-Massey, unfortunately, doesn't take into account the evolution of values. So I think if you're looking where values come from, it's important to look at Massey, and these are legitimate, I think, places where one might find values, or where one might find the formation of values occurring in an individual. The major time for formation of values for an individual child is about age ten. The child at age ten generally goes from inside the family to outside the family and adopts heroes. Massey's point of view with regards to values is that who you are is where you were when you were 10. I don't know if you remember what was happening when you were 10. For some of us who were in a generation that's a little bit older, they were dropping the atomic bomb and there was the Korean War and we saw all of that on television and that was very interesting. We were crowding under desks because it was thought that the desk would provide us from, or protect us from an atomic bomb going off right over our heads, which we later figured out when we saw the pictures of Hiroshima that that wasn't actually the case. In fact, that if an atomic bomb went off it was probably best to be in the middle of it. And so know, and I don't know where you guys were when you were 10, but as you listen to this tape set, you might want to just notice what was going on in the world when you were 10 and what sort of heroes did you have, what sort of heroes did you adopt as a result of that. What did those heroes believe in? What were the positive traits and attributes that That's what Massey says is essentially how our values are formed. Like I said, unfortunately, Massey doesn't take into account that people change their values. My experience personally is that people's values change all the time. Actually, the interesting thing about NLP is, because when I first wrote this chapter on values, people said, are you really going to publish it? And I went, yeah. And they said, well, you're going to publish how to change values
[1365.10 - 1369.42]  like that directly? And I said, yeah. They said, well, how could you possibly do that? And I said,
[1369.44 - 1387.46]  well, people change values all the time. They said, what do you mean? I said, well, remember all those people who dropped out and had peace signs and said, you know, we're not into money? What do you think most of them are doing? They're now actually in the stock market working as commodities futures brokers not really no just kidding but SEC
[1387.46 - 1445.44]  people anyway and the fact is that people's values change all the time. And so I think it's perfectly appropriate for us as individuals to, as individuals doing values work in timeline therapy, to be able to assist people in NLP, to assist people to be able to make changes in their values as they wish.. So if we're going to change values, then let's look at how values change anyway. And that's the evolution of values, which essentially comes to us from Claire Graves. Interestingly enough, and Claire Graves is on page 317. Interestingly enough, Claire Graves was a professor at the State University of New York. And most of his work was done in the 70s. Interestingly enough, Graves did not actually publish any books. But he had a theory which survives him to this day. Graves did write a number of magazine articles and a number of papers on it. However, the folks
[1445.44 - 1505.18]  at the National Value Center have really captured, especially Don Edward Beck and Chris Collin, have really captured the spirit of Graves' work. Don and Chris have actually, in a sense, been able to take and put Claire Graves' system into a workable system that will allow us to discover what a person's values are in terms of the different values levels, and to take that and to use that in, I think, the most useful places in business consulting or in family or relationship counseling. So let's talk about the different levels of values that exist and then how they might interact. And then we'll move on to how values are organized. Values level one, Claire Graves says, there are no more people. Actually, I would disagree with that. I think that values level one is today
[1505.18 - 1507.36]  most closely personified by the street people
[1507.36 - 1509.30]  who live on the street and who are into survival.
[1509.72 - 1511.10]  They're not banded together,
[1511.22 - 1512.88]  so they're not tribal at this point,
[1513.02 - 1516.44]  and their work generally relies on individual survival.
[1517.42 - 1521.32]  You probably, one of the things is
[1521.32 - 1524.66]  that you probably will not find anyone like this
[1524.66 - 1689.80]  coming in to you for counseling. Therefore, values level one is not represented on the National Value Center values test. By the way, if you're listening to this tape and you have not got a National Value Center values test, please call our office at 1-800-800-MIND and ask us to send you a values test. There will be a nominal charge for that and you can get a values test which you can take and fill out so that you have an idea of what level of values you're at. So values level one is survival oriented and it's people living alone simply into survival and not banding together. And the first time people begin to band together is the tribe. And so they become tribal, and values level two is where, essentially where, it's very connected to the planet. It's like where the original teachings of the peoples of the earth sprung from. And in essence, during this time period in Values Level 2, all of the wishes of the individual are subservient to the wishes of the person who's the head of the tribe, generally called the chief. And people in Values Level 2 have a very close relationship with the planet in such that the trees and rocks actually talk to them. And they also – but see, there are still some remnants of values level two in you. How many people here carry a lucky stone or a lucky coin or a lucky key or some kind of lucky charm with them? Is anybody – people aren't admitting it. They're going, oh, I'm not going to – not me. Or do you have a lucky shirt or a lucky crystal that you carry or wear? Values level three. Now, here's what happens. At the end of values level two, what I'm interested in personally is transitions. So what happens at the end of values level two is that some younger people, often men but not necessarily, say, well well I'm not going to wait for the chief to die to take over, I'm going to, the heck with that, the heck with the rules, the heck with the tribe, I'm going to break out on my own. And that's Values Level 3. It's aggression oriented and my favorite name for Values Level 3 is Rambo. You can think of Sylvester Stallone at his best in all of his movies, and Rambo is a real clear example of someone operating out of values level three. It's aggression-oriented, and the big dog wins and the little dog goes yipping back to the tribe. And the more firepower you've You've got, the more you can kick butt, the stronger you are, and that's values level
[1689.80 - 1846.58]  three. and the more firepower you've got, the more you can kick butt, the stronger you are, and that's values level three with all of its aggression. And something happens along the way. Here's the transition from values level three to four. It actually is most personified by the old gunfighter of the West. Values level three is I'm the law in this community. That's the values level three sheriff. I'm the law in this community and you better listen to what I say. But what happens with the gunfighter in the Old West is as he gets a little bit older and all the young bucks are gunning for him, he begins to think, gee, there's got to be more than this. And he may transition into values level four, which in the U.S. in the Old West, was personified mostly by the introduction of laws in communities. And the shift from I'm the law in this community to there are laws in this community about right and wrong. And the shift from the individual sheriff who was aggression oriented into the system of having police forces or police patrols to police the area moves us into values level four. Values level four is interesting. It was the values level that created the Catholic Church, and also the Communist Party, as well as most of the governments on the planet. And essentially what it says is that, values level three is, by the way, is aggression oriented and sort of a now thing. And what it says is the heck with the tribe, the heck with the system, I'm going to get everything I can right now. Values level four says, look, we have a society, we need to run the society and be orderly, and so we're going to delay our rewards, and our rewards will either come, and depending on the system, either come when I retire, or will come when the system flourishes, or the reward will come when I die, as in the case of the church. So the church itself delays reward until after death, and the corporate system, the corporate values level four system delays reward, which is the gold watch, the retirement party, and thanks for serving us for all these years. And at some point, the young person looks at, the young buck looks at his dad or his uncle who got the gold watch and goes, hey, I'm not going to wait for 40 years for a gold watch. I want to go out and get one right now, but I'm not really going to be aggression oriented like values level three. I'll take into account what the laws are and I'll work inside the law and the system and that brings us to values level five, which is an active hierarchy materialistically oriented. Values level five is the best and the worst of American culture. It's Lee Iacocca at his best rescuing Chrysler with an individual
[1846.58 - 1852.70]  effort that brings Chrysler back to its feet. It's unfortunately the values level five is
[1852.70 - 1859.66]  the same values level that allowed us to rape the planet, to strip mine, to ruin the ozone.
[1859.66 - 1864.48]  And what happens is that values level six comes along and values level six says hey
[1864.48 - 1925.92]  we're in trouble, we gotta begin to look at saving the planet. And Values Level 6 says that this individual who, or the individual sort of approach isn't really it, so we want to bring into account, take into account everyone in the group needs to be satisfied. So values level six becomes more of a social networking, and of course the values level six is a group and cause oriented, save the whales, actually any cause will do. Save the whales, save the environment, don't pack the dolphins in with the tuna, save the ozone, stop the, anyway, Anyway the depletion of the planet, all of those things. And what happened was, and values level six is a great values level except for one thing, and that is that group management doesn't actually work, at least not the way values level six sets it up, because values level six wants everyone to be happy and wants to take into account everyone's needs and everyone's wishes.
[1926.40 - 1928.00]  And so, and I don't know if you've ever been
[1928.00 - 1929.40]  in a Values Level 6 business meeting,
[1929.56 - 1930.76]  but personally I have.
[1930.84 - 1939.44]  I've run some, and I want you to know, for those of you who are listening to the tapes who knew me then, I'm embarrassed by the entire. But those meetings used to go on for hours and hours, and you get down with them
[1939.44 - 1939.64]  and you go,
[1939.76 - 1941.40]  what in the world did we do?
[1941.50 - 1942.26]  Bless our hearts.
[1942.42 - 1944.14]  We feel very good about it.
[1944.24 - 1945.88]  We're in great shape.
[1945.98 - 1946.90]  It's really nice.
[1947.00 - 1947.74]  Everybody feels good,
[1947.86 - 1945.86]  but what are the results? in the world did we do? Bless our hearts. We feel very good about it. We're in great shape.
[1945.98 - 1947.98]  It's really nice. Everybody feels good, but
[1947.98 - 1950.20]  what are the results?
[1950.30 - 1952.28]  And people would like to sit around and go, I don't know what the results are.
[1952.36 - 1953.82]  So out of that comes values level 7.
[1954.08 - 1956.18]  Values level 7 says, hey, hey, hey, wait
[1956.18 - 1958.22]  a minute. There's got to be somebody at the
[1958.22 - 1959.68]  helm of the ship. Doesn't matter who.
[1960.66 - 2066.52]  But somebody's got to pilot the boat, steer the plane, run the car, drive the bus, because if we're all trying to drive the bus, there's too many shifts and too many different ways to go. So values level seven, and according to Claire Graves, values level seven, this whole thing was a sort of a helix spiral, and according to Graves, values level seven is the first reload coming around again, and he says that values level seven is a sort of a reawakening of values level one at a brand new level. And so values level seven is, um, a functional flow. It's, it's, uh, it's where the individual, uh, once again, um, strikes out and begins to, to move away from group-oriented causes and more toward management but with a global viewpoint. Values level seven essentially says, look, we're not going to rape the planet, we're not going to deplete the ozone, and it doesn't matter if I'm in charge because certainly anyone who's got the skills can manage this project. Values level seven, by the way, is the first level where situational management is possible. If you're doing any business consulting and you're working with teams of situational management, don't make the mistake of trying to have values level 3, 4, 5, or even values level 6 participate in situational management. The group really needs to be up to values level 7. Audience member 7 is results oriented. Audience member 7 is results oriented. Values level 7 essentially says, know, I'm sorry to say this, but the sort of social network group and cause-oriented did not particularly work for me because we got no results, so let's put somebody in charge and see what happens. And then values level eight takes and broadens the point of view of values level 7 to a more global perspective.
[2067.48 - 2071.54]  And essentially, that's what Claire Graves says at Values Evolve.
[2071.84 - 2075.08]  There are some theories outside of the Graves system
[2075.08 - 2080.96]  which postulate values levels 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13.
[2081.78 - 2084.62]  And I'd like to spend a moment looking at those,
[2087.28 - 2098.28]  and that's on the page called Transition of Values, which is on page 325. This is the end of tape 23, side A.
