[0.00 - 386.00]  Well, this is fabulous because I got to demonstrate parts integration and also using the peripheral vision as part of an intervention. So what I'd like you to do next is to go through and do what we did. So you're going to take the values hierarchy with the same group of people, same groups. What I'd like you to do is go back and do what we did so you're going to take the values hierarchy with the same group of people same groups and what I'd like you to do is go back and literally go through your values hierarchy and look at the values that are present notice the away from and have the client go into Hakala into peripheral vision peripheral vision, and notice if the away-froms disappear simply with that intervention, using that neurological driver. The truth is that, in my experience, this may not clear up all the away-froms, but clearing up all the away-froms in a person's given hierarchy requires this. And you may want to write this down. And the best place to write this is to me, and I don't want to tell you where to put your notes, but somewhere near page 324, because that's the page you're going to use to go through all of the elicitations. So in my opinion, there's going to be a number of things. I've done the secret of creating your future for since 1989. We've worked with about 60 people, anywhere from 60 to 400 people on an average weekend for at least 12 or more times per year since 1989. And my experience is that timeline therapy, getting rid of negative emotions, is going to be a majorly positive intervention for getting rid of away froms. In the average room over the last, since 1989, when getting rid of all the negative emotions for a client that is primarily anger, sadness, fear, and guilt, that will cause most of the people in the room to have most of their away froms disappear. That will cause most of the people in the room to have most of their away froms disappear. In addition you may have to do timeline therapy for limiting decisions. The limiting decisions will have to be in the context that you're working on with the values. In addition, experientially, Hakalau may be a, or peripheral vision may be a very good way also to expand context and also to cause a shift to occur for the client. So we're talking about then three major ways of reducing or eliminating the away froms. One is timeline therapy, the intervention for negative emotions. The second is limiting decisions, timeline therapy. And the third is akala or peripheral vision. In addition, parts integration may also be indicated for handling toward-toward conflict. Those four interventions primarily should allow you to clean up any values hierarchy. Okay, does that make sense? Those four integrations primarily are what you're going to use to clear up and integrate any sort of values hierarchy problems that occur. And doing that, the client and you should be able to end up with a values hierarchy that is essentially primarily tort. One final caveat, and that is that you need to check the ecology with the client, because the client in a business situation may still need to keep the ability to evaluate away from us. Not necessarily to focus on away from us, but the client may need to keep the ability to evaluate away-froms because I think you'll agree that a top-notch manager in a business needs to anticipate what could go wrong without focusing on it, as well as what could go right in a given project. So I'm not suggesting that ultimately that we take away the ability to evaluate away-from. We're just wanting to shift the focus. And remember, the first thing we said in this training was that you tend to get what you focus on. So we want to have the ability to shift the focus so the client doesn't focus on what they don't want, but they still retain the ability to look at and see what could go wrong in a given situation. Or they'll need to have a really good lawyer to review their contracts, one who could also, because that's essentially what lawyers do, is they focus on what could go wrong and they mismatch what currently is. I'm not knocking lawyers. Primarily that's their training. A good lawyer is going to be someone who is well aware of away froms and also who mismatches current offers and situations so the client can also have, be really clear about what the possibilities are. Is that right? Yeah. Okay. So, given that, given all of that, then one could go ahead and do an intervention. There's just one more thing I want to go over before we actually get to our intervention. Okay, we're about to do an intervention. But before we do the intervention, I want to go back and review the values levels. Because one thing that's important is intuitively knowing what those values levels are in terms of the content of them, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Then you'll be able to structure your intervention in a way that continues to move a person forward in terms of their evolution. Like I said, I think it would be someone who moved into values level 6, if they came to you because they weren't making as much money as they used to, I think it it might be problematical to move them back to values level five. So would you please, just for fun, take out your values survey that you did, because the values surveys that you did will tell you essentially what your values are in each of those values areas. And we're going to look for this, we're going to look at this at wall chart number 22 to look and see... Just the graph. Yeah, just the graph. So we're going to look and see, first of all, everyone in the room. So the first thing that we have is we have accepted values, which are marked by a plus sign on our wall chart, and rejected values, which are marked by a minus sign on our wall chart, and rejected values which are
[386.00 - 405.72]  marked by a minus sign on our wall chart. And in order to get this, what you're going to do is you're going to take out your sheet with the horizontal blue line and look at the back of it. And let's see what each, let's see what our, and what I'd like you to do, this is the back here, it's got a horizontal blue line on the blue line on the back. It's the two-fold sheet, not the test you took, but where the graph
[405.72 - 489.32]  is. And what I'd like you to do is to look at the graph and look at the part in the center where the blue line is. We're going to be working with that blue segment of this graph. Notice that values level two is in the middle. Values level two is in the middle. Okay, then values level three is to the left of that, and 4 is to the right of 2. And then values level 5 is the second one from the left, and values number 6 is the second one from the right, and then 7 is left and 8 is right. If you look at the top values, they are the accepted values. That is to say, the values that you personally accept. If you look at the bottom values, they are rejected values. Those are the values that you personally reject. Does everyone understand the difference between accepted and rejected values? Like, if you accepted values level three, you'd go watch Rambo movies. If you highly rejected values level three, you wouldn't. Does that make sense? I think it does. Okay, so, you guys ready? If you are, if your highest values level is values level 2, then raise your hand. Do you understand what I'm saying? Okay. Should I start again?
[489.32 - 745.96]  Did you understand what I just said about how the chart was made up? Okay, we're looking for the highest accepted values. What I'd like you to do is to look horizontally across the blue line in the center position, if your highest values, values level two, if your highest values are in that, in other words, the highest number is in that box, then raise your hand. Okay, so we have nobody at values level two. Acceptance. For how many people was the highest rejected value, number two, acceptance. For how many people was the highest rejected value number two? Highest number horizontally. So look at the numbers horizontally, look in the center box, look underneath at the bottom of that and notice if that's your highest number, raise your hand, keep it up because we're going to count okay so 20 okay well we won't be talking about any uh rocks talking to the rocks and trees with you guys okay values level three for how many people values level three for how many people was number values level three the highest accepted set of values that you have? Highest accepted. Okay. Zero. And for how many people was values level 3 the highest rejected set of values you had? So that's 58% roughly. Good. Thank you. For how many people was values level four the highest accepted value that you had? Values level four. Highest accepted value. Okay, 2%. For how many people was values level four the highest rejected value that you had? 12%. Okay, by the way, for those of you who raised your hand on values level three, we won't be showing any Rambo movies this week. For those of you whose highest rejected was values level four, we probably will not join the union. Somebody's going, good, okay. Okay, values level five. For how many people was people was values level five the highest accepted value okay eighteen percent okay how many people was values level five the highest rejected value okay well then we won't be trashing entrepreneurs this week. For how many people was values level 6 the highest accepted value? 24%. And for how many people was values level 6 the highest rejected value? Okay, well, you and I won't be going to the Save the Whales meeting. 4%. 4%, okay. And values level seven. For how many people's values level seven, the highest accepted value? Eight percent. Is that right? And for how many people's values level seven, the highest rejected value? Two percent. Geez, value level seven is sort of an unpopular level, or not popular. And values level 8, for how many people was values level 8 the highest accepted value? 46%. And for how many people was values level 8 the highest rejected value? Okay, zero. Okay, well, for those of you in values level 8, we'll be talking about saving the planet in sort of a dignified way that produces results. Okay. People are going, yeah, yeah, that's it. Now we're talking. Okay. Who has the highest score? We're still looking at the same place. Look at the accepted values for five. Who's got the highest score for... Anybody got higher than a 55 for five? Higher than a 55 for five? 55? Ian, what do you got? 75. Anybody got a higher than 75? Ian, you didn't have too much
[745.96 - 786.86]  other than that, did you? Because those are like forced choices. No, you didn't have any too much that you accepted other than that. So Ian is 75, the number 75. And Ian, what do you do, by the way. You own your own company, right? Hmm. Do we, does that, yeah, okay. That does make sense then. And a zero for rejection of five. You had a six rejection. Okay, so what that says to me is that Ian is right in five and you're beginning to transition out. Beginning. Okay, number six. Who's got the highest, who's got the highest values level six?
[805.58 - 807.64]  Who's the biggest Save the Whales fan? Admit it. Come on. 24% of the room. 38, 46, 46 once. 58, 58 once, 58 once, 58 twice. 70, 70. We'll give that to Mary. Thank you, Mary. 70. Seventy is our highest accepted.
[885.84 - 945.10]  Yeah, she can be president of our, the ecology federation of individuals. And we'll, Mary, you don't have to do much. We'll just go for group consensus. Right? It works for me, she says. It works for me. Okay. Oh, and we got to do the eights here okay who's the highest eight 49 49 once 50 63 what 84 oh no look out you're definitely motivated anybody got higher than 84 i don't. There's not that many points left. There's not that many points left on that test. That's great, Susan. Susan's got an 84 as to global change, empowerment, planetary, enlightenment, and all-around good person. But in addition to having such a high score, she's going to be compelled to do something about it. Okay. Yeah, I know, she's an introvert. Whoa. But that makes sense because eight is not an outgoing system. It's an inward-focused system. Yeah, she's just fine. She's right in the right place. But she will be beginning to feel something that she needs to do. So that's who we are as a group. That's who we are as a group. It's fun to sort of notice who the people are because you all know them. We've been together for two or three weeks, most of us. And it's interesting to notice who the people are in terms of who are the high scorers here, because they're going to probably be pretty personified, pretty typical of the folks who are in those patterns and so forth. So it's kind of fun to look at that as you do that. And I think it's vital to look at the overall big picture of the values as you're about to do an intervention. I used to do, I used to actually give every client that I talked to, I used to give a Claire Graves values tester from the National Value Center. And by the way, the result of taking this training, you can order these from the National Value Center. They're quite expensive, but they're worth it.
[945.38 - 946.72]  I think they're like $5 apiece.
[946.94 - 948.48]  Maybe they're $10 apiece.
[949.20 - 966.72]  They're $10 apiece, but they're absolutely worth it. You get the chart, which is in the middle there, of your folded-over piece of paper, and you get the self-scoring test. So they're really good to do, especially in the case of relationships and when you're doing work when you're doing values work the these this
[966.72 - 1045.60]  particular values test plus the values transitions on page 325, the transitions of what gets you from one level to the next, gives you an idea of the direction to move and the possible issues which you need to let go of, and I think all of those are important in designing a values intervention. So here's what I'd like you to do. What I'd like you to do is get together with your values group, your same values group, and now, with all of this in mind, all of the values that we just reviewed in mind, and the toward and away from issues that we just looked at, is to look at and design whatever intervention your client needs, which essentially means that you'll do, you'll handle any away froms using the process of Hockleau or peripheral vision. For this exercise, we will not do a timeline therapy intervention. However, if you know timeline therapy and can do it, we will suggest that when you get into the timeline therapy section that you do a timeline therapy intervention for the values intervention. And you'll also do a parts integration if that's called for and necessary. Okay? And then if the client wants to shift values, and not all clients do, if the client wants to shift values in the hierarchy, then you're also going to do that. Okay, that's the exercise we're about to do.
[1045.80 - 1046.14]  Yes, David?
[1046.58 - 1053.78]  What happens if the person you're eliciting doesn't have any away from?
[1054.42 - 1055.88]  Then you say to the person,
[1056.52 - 1057.64]  You are the Buddha.
[1059.08 - 1060.10]  You are the Buddha.
[1061.48 - 1063.52]  And you are the flower.
[1146.06 - 1146.18]  I am the sap. Oh, oh yes that's what you say i mean hey you know it's cool and if someone in your group doesn't have any away from slap them around a little bit no no that's a joke oh is that bad i might have been bad again okay so that's the exercise If you're going to do that exercise, please stop the tape and do the exercise now. Stop the tape now. Welcome back. What questions or comments do you have about this last intervention? Matthew, you look like a happy camper. Getting there more and more every second. I realized, actually, I spent time just integrating what was going on and re-eliciting my values now and got to the top five. And it actually surprised me when I was going through them that there's only one away from now. They're all towards. Oh, man. 90% towards, 80% towards, 50% towards, 60% towards. What's going on here? And I've also worked out the sequential incongruency between a towards and away from. Good. And that that is a major, major thing in my life that has been, and that's a timeline therapy one.
[1147.42 - 1164.84]  Well, fabulous, so good job. Yeah. Excellent, so you're going to clear that up in timeline therapy. Absolutely. Excellent, all right, all right. Rebel. I had a really great experience. Rosemary actually was being the master practitioner for me, and what I noticed was that once I had aligned my values and it felt really great for me, and we swapped roles and I was the master practitioner
[1164.84 - 1167.48]  that I was watching her as she went into Hakalau
[1167.48 - 1187.14]  and really noticing that I could feel her energy field and not only that, but see like a lot. A few things happening. Yeah, and it's really interesting because the thing that we actually cleared up with the parts integration was expression of self. And what I realized was that the reason why i couldn't see
[1187.14 - 1285.16]  those things like i used to was because i shut down the expression of myself and so now that i've integrated that it's all coming back and it's really nice that's good that's good that's really good so it sounds like there were some good effects from this exercise from this process. Any other comments or questions? I'm so curious. Hello. How could, I mean, this hand here that moves in that, what neurons does that attack? The other ones. It works with the other neurons, Linda. Was this found accidentally? On purpose, actually. On purpose. It's really wonderful. It's not so much the hand. What the hand does is it calls attention to the peripheral. So the hand isn't actually doing anything except continuing to call your attention into the peripheral vision, which essentially, as we mentioned the very first day, takes you outside of the context because the peripheral vision is contextual vision and the foveal vision is specific vision or central part of your vision. So what this does is neurologically takes you out of the context that you're in, allows you to have another context for it, and actually takes out boundaries. So it takes out the boundaries of the presenting problem neurologically i found for me that it really really moved it because one thing i used to do is i felt i had a very strong peripheral uh vision but the hand movement just blew that even way all that did was all that is you to stay in peripheral vision, so that's good.
[1286.34 - 1287.02]  Thank you.
[1287.16 - 1427.64]  You bet. And thank you. Yes, Matthew, you're back. Yeah, just something I wanted to comment on, and I will say that my top rep system is auditory, but up on stage... That sounds good to me. Yeah, perfect. When I was in peripheral vision, that it wasn't that i could hear the tape player yeah going so it's amazing how much did it have a beat to it or just a no just that it's how much all your rep systems go out into the peripheral so that that feeling is an amazing feeling when you connect with that for the first time that it's not just your vision that can do that, but your kinesthetic, your auditory, the whole lot. Right. Right. And actually what it does is it takes us outside of context. So what fun, huh? Moves our awareness into the peripheral. Other questions about values alignment? So you guys have the tools now to align all of your values in all the six areas. And my great hope is that you would do that, that you would actually take the values processes that you've learned in this value segment and go ahead and get all of your values in life aligned. Again, the process is going to be to clean up the away-froms and to let go of them, to integrate any parts, conflicts, and to clean up anything in the past that needs to be cleaned up with regards to that. That's going to be the process and so your homework, should you choose to accept it, is to go ahead and set that all up and align it. And what's going to happen is you'll find a new order coming out of the values that you had previously. What you'll find is that there's a whole new level of orderliness that comes out of the, what we could say perhaps was more chaotic and now will be more orderly as you move into aligning your values and getting all of the values aligned at the unconscious level. At least that's what I think is the process and that would be the next step. That would be where to take it from here. What I want to talk about next is, and I want to conclude this NLP Master Practitioner Training with a discussion about NLP and healing and it will primarily be a discussion. And we'll point to lots of other areas that we've hinted at. We'll actually point to them, and we'll actually look at where we're going to go.
[1430.86 - 1434.94]  This is the end of Tape 27, Side B.
